https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0003114/18430403/025/0003

The Albion
Monday 03 April 1843
p3

BUNDLING, "ONE OF THE INSTITUTIONS" OF WALES.

-At the Beaumoris Assizes, on the 23d ult., a case of seduction, Pritchard v. Roberts, was tried. Mr. Townsend, in opening the case for the plaintiff, stated that the plaintiff and defendant were farmers, residing on adjacent farms, near Pwllheli. The former had three daughters, one of whom had been seduced by the defendant, he being her suitor at the time, and courting her according to the custom of the country, namely, in bed ; and the parent was suing the seducer for compensation for the loss or his daughter's services, she having borne a child to the defendant about two years ago. The plaintiff's daughter was, at the commencement of the courtship, little more than eighteen years of age. The defendant was twenty-eight. 1 The custom of the country, to which he had alluded, might, in fact, be regarded as one of its regular institutions ; land, though it might be a very dangerous one for the female, because it gave the man an opportunity for seduction, it redounded to the morality of the country that the cases were rare in which a father had to seek redress from a jury, the suitor seldom being base enough to take advantage of the confidence reposed in him. It unfortunately was otherwise in the present instance, for the defendant had taken the advantage, and effected her seduction. Evidence was then produced. Mary Pritchard admitted, on cross-examination, that her sister Laura had also had a child by a man whom she was courting according to the custom of the country. Mr. Temple appeared for the defendant, and said it was unnecessary for him to call any I witnesses for the defence, as the case for the plaintiff was in itself so flagrantly profligate. He then animadverted, in strong terms, on the immoral and degrading courtship practices which prevail amongst the rural population of the country, and said that that which hislearned friend had, in his confident language, termed one of the institutions of the country, would be deemed a disgrace even to savages. The learned counsel concluded by calling on the natives of the principality to protect their sisters and daughters by scouting the custom of the country, as it was called, and thus putting an end to such disgraceful actions. Mr. Justice Williams, in summing up, said the principal question in the case was, whether the father had been guarded or otherwise. It appeared that on the first night the parties sat up by the kitchen fire; that on the next night they went to bed by themselves; and that this sort of courtship was carried on once, twice, and sometimes three times a week, until the disaster happened. If the jury were of opinion that there was no danger in this; that there was nothing in such propinquity calculated to excite the passions to break through all bounds, then he must say that Wales was a most uncommon country; but, if, on the contrary, they thought that care, vigilance, and caution were necessary to protect the virtue of the woman, then, undoubtedly, the plaintiff had brought the evil on himself as a necessary consequence. If in Wales there was a confident trust in the absence of passion that promised safety, certainly no such reliance was had in any other part - of-the empire; and, to his mind, where the intercourse of the sexes was so facile, it appeared necessarily, a priori, to lead to evil results. The Jury found for the plaintiff..- Damages, £2. 2s. 
