
https://archive.org/details/antiquarianreper02gros/page/100/mode/2up?q=SCHROSBERY

The Antiquarian repertory: a miscellany intended to preserve and illustrate several valuable remains of old times: adorned with elegant sculptures
by Grose, Francis, 1731?-1791; Astle, Thomas, 1735-1803

Publication date 1775

p100-102

SCHROSBERY. 

The Severn is navigable to Schrosbery, I passed it over a large stone bridge,
at the entrance there is a suburb, the church of which appears to me to have formerly belonged to some fine abbey. I ascended from thence to the town, which is mounted on the platform of a rock, scarped on almost every side, which renders its situation naturally strong; besides which, the wall that encloses it made it difficult to be scaled; the environs consist of large woods and high mountains, nevertheless this town is filled with people and rich shop-keepers, who dwell in two large streets, one leading to the market, place, and the other turning from this place towards the left. Near which are the Great Church, the Exchange, and Town-hall, they are in a street called Aystrit [High Street], which is so broad that it seems a long market-place, terminating at one of the ends of the town, where stands the Castle and commands it, being more elevated, and by so much the stronger as it is environed on one side by broad ditches, closed with good walls, and on the other there is no approach to it, on account of the steepness of the rock, but it has been ruined by the late wars, in so much that excepting a few towers and some lodgings within, I see nothing remarkable.

I met nothing more pleasing to me than the funeral ceremonies at the interment of a My Lord, which mine host procured me the fight of. The relations and friends being assembled in the house of the defunct, the minister advanced into the middle of the chamber, where, before the company, he made a funeral oration, representing the great actions of the deceased, his virtues, his qualities, his titles of nobility, and those of the whole family, so that nothing more could be said towards consoling every one of the company for the great loss they had sustained in this man, and principally the relations who were seated round the dead body, and whom he assured that he was gone to heaven, the seat of all sorts of happiness, whereas the world that he had just left was replete with misery. It is to be remarked, that during this oration there stood upon the coffin a large pot of wine, out of which every one drank to the health of the deceased, hoping that he might surmount the difficulties he had to encounter in his road to Paradise, where, by the mercy of God, he was about to enter, on which mercy they founded all their hope, without considering their evil life, their wicked religion, and that God is just. This being finished, six men took up the corps and carried it on their shoulders to the church; it was covered with a large cloth, which the four nearest relations held each by a corner with one hand, and in the other carried a bough; the other relations and friends had in one hand a flambeau, and in the other a bough, marching thus through the street, without singing, or saying any prayer, till they came to the church, where having placed the body on tressels and taken off the cloth from the coffin, which is ordinarily made of fine walnut-tree, handsomely worked and ornamented with iron bandages, chafed in the manner of a buffet. The minister then ascended his pulpit, and every one being seated round about the coffin, which is placedin a kind of parade in the middle of the church, he read a portion of the Holy Scripture concerning the resurrection of the dead, and afterwards sang some psalms, to which all the company answered. After this he descended, having his bough in his hand like the rest of the congregation; this he threw on the dead body when it was put into the grave, as did all the relations, extinguishing their flambeaus in the earth with which the corps was to be covered. This finished, every one retired to his home without farther ceremony, and I departed from Schrosbury for Chester, and having passed over a large desart plain, I reached Addar, Morton, and a Castle. The country here is barren; passed a river near a windmill; from thence to Pries and Vitechurch on a river. Here is a manufactory of woollen cloth. The road lies afterwards over some mountains, where are several good inns all alone; Empost is one. Came to Anlai, and some small woods, having the river on the right, which runs to Chester.

---


https://archive.org/details/antiquarianreper04ingros

The Antiquarian repertory: a miscellaneous assemblage of topography, history, biography, customs, and manners; intended to illustrate and preserve several valuable remains of old times - New edition
by Grose, Francis, 1731?-1791; Astle, Thomas, 1735-1803; Jeffery, Edward

Volume IV

1807



p584-6

DESCRIPTION OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND, IN THE 17th century: BY JOREVIN.

Starts p549

Then p584

...

SCHROSBERY.

The Severn is navigable to Schrosbery; I passed it over a large stone bridge. At the entrance there is a suburb, the church of which appears to me to have formerly belonged to some fine abbey. I ascended from thence to the town, which is mounted on the platform of a rock, scarped on almost every side, which renders its situation naturally strong; besides which, the wall that encloses it makes it difficult to be scaled. The environs consist of large woods and high mountains. Nevertheless, this town is filled with people and rich shopkeepers, who dwell in two large streets, one leading to the market-place, and the other turning from this place towards the left, near which are the Great Church, the Exchange and Town-hall. They are in a street called [Hight Street] Aystrit, which is so broad that it seems a long market-place, terminating at one of the ends of the town; where stands the castle, and commands it, being more elevated, and by so much the stronger as it is environed on one side by broad ditches, closed with good walls, and on the other there is no approach to it, on account of the steepness of the rock; but it has been ruined by the late wars, insomuch that, excepting a few towers and some lodgings within, I see nothing remarkable.

I met nothing more pleasing to me than the funeral ceremonies at the interment of a My Lord, which mine host procured me the sight of. The relations and friends being assembled in the house of the defunct, the minister advanced into the middle of the chamber, where, before the company, he made a funeral oration, representing the great actions of the deceased, his virtues, his qualities, his titles of nobility, and those of the whole family; so that nothing more could be said towards consoling every one of the company for the great loss they had sustained in this man, and principally the relations, who were seated round the dead body, and whom he assured that he was gone to heaven, the seat of all sorts of happiness, whereas the world that he had just left was replete with misery. It is to be remarked, that during this oration there stood upon the coffin a large pot of wine, out of which every one drank to the health of the deceased, hoping that he might surmount the difficulties he had to encounter in his road to Paradise, where, by the mercy of God, he was about to enter; on which mercy they founded all their hope, without considering their evil life, their wicked religion, and that God is just. This being finished, six men took up the corpse, and carried it on their shoulders to the church; it was covered with a large cloth, which the four nearest relations held each by a corner with one hand, and in the other carried a bough. The other relations and friends had in one hand a flambeau, and in the other a bough, marching thus through the street, without singing, or saying any prayer, till they came to the church, where, having placed the body on trestles, and taken off the cloth from the coffin (which is ordinarily made of fine walnut-tree, handsomely worked and ornamented with iron bandages, chased in the manner of a buffet) the minister then ascended his pulpit, and, every one being seated round about the coffin, which is placed in a kind of parade in the middle of the church, he read a portion of Holy Scripture, concerning the resurrection of the dead, and afterwards sang some psalms, to which all the company answered. After this he descended, having his bough in his hand like the rest of the congregation; this he threw on the dead body when it was put into the grave, as did all the relations, extinguishing their flambeaux in the earth with which the corpse was to be covered. This finished, every one retired to his home without farther ceremony, and I departed from Schrosbury for Chester. Having passed over a large desert plain, I reached Addar, Morton, and a castle. The country here is barren. Passed a river near a windmill; from thence to Pries and Vitechurch, on a river. Here is a manufactory of woollen cloth. The road lies afterwards over some mountains, where are several good inns, all alone; Empost is one. Came to Anlai, and some small woods, having the river on the right, which runs to Chester.
