https://archive.org/details/antiquitiesoflau00curt/page/206/mode/2up?q=funeral

The antiquities of Laugharne, Pendine, and their neighbourhood, Carmarthenshire, Amroth, Sandersfoot, Cilgetty, Pembrokeshire, South Wales
by Curtis, Mary (published for the author)

1880

p206-7

They had this very remarkable custom: — I was informed by a respectable farmer of Eglwyscummin parish, who died in old age in 1875, that his father told him that there was a person appointed to every church, whose office was to go to the church on All Hallows Eve to hear the names of those who would die the next year, called. An old woman of this town, dead now sixty years, is remembered by some old people as going on this eve to Laugharne church to stand by the chancel window, where they say she distinctly heard the names pronounced. She said that, as she had been once to hear the names called, she was bound to go at every future eve. I was told by one of the most respectable and esteemed old inhabitants of this town, that in his presence some one said to her, that a lady then dangerously ill, and given over, would die. She said, "No; for her name was not called." She did recover and live many years. And another time she foretold that a funeral of a person would take place shortly in Laugharne church, which it did. In Cardiganshire, on All Hallows Eve, it was the custom to sit in the porch of the church to see those pass through who should die that year. I am not quite sure that this was not on St. John's day, 24th June. I give no opinion, though I would not declare them falsehoods, or the results of imagination. Which is the worst to believe — too much or too little? Some people, deeming themselves very wise and superior to such credulity, with a wonderfully wise look, condemn these as mere superstitions.


---

https://archive.org/details/antiquitiesoflau00curt/page/212/mode/2up?q=funeral

The antiquities of Laugharne, Pendine, and their neighbourhood, Carmarthenshire, Amroth, Sandersfoot, Cilgetty, Pembrokeshire, South Wales
by Curtis, Mary

Publication date 1880


p213-7

When a death occurred, a boy was sent round the town and neighbourhood to give notice, and invite to the sitting up; he rang a small bell to draw attention. People were expected to come to the funerals in their neighbourhood, even without invitation; families would be offended if they did not. There is something very beautiful in the care the Welsh show for the dead, and in their customs at burials. It proves their kindliness and reverential feeling. They think it wanting in feeling to leave the dead body in the room by itself for a single instant. The face was exposed, a number of candles kept burning all night, and those who came to sit up brought presents of tea, sugar, and candles. An old inhabitant of this town, who died 20 years ago, aged 89, was at a wake kept in a room of the old inn, called the Dials, now in ruins. During the night, in presence of the departed, a number of men and women, she said, played different games. One was called "Trounsing;" it was like blind-man's buff. If the young man who was blindfolded caught a young woman, she was his sweetheart for that year. No more remains of these customs in Laugharne, except the presents of candles, etc., which friends do bring. A large number of people followed the deceased to the church. They assembled outside the house; cake and mulled beer were offered to all; four chairs were placed outside to rest the coffin on; the clerk of the church gave out two or three verses of a hymn, and all sang; as they passed to the church they sang the remainder. This custom prevailed to within 50 or 60 years. I remember, in 1871, an old inhabitant, at the funeral of his niece, having cake and mulled beer for the company assembled before his house. In Laugharne a number of people still attend funerals; there is something very pleasing in this last attention paid to the departed. How often of an afternoon do you hear the slow, measured tread of a large company passing down the ancient town to the last resting-place! I hope it will long be heard. They placed rosemary and laurel on the coffin. A white rose sometimes placed on the grave of a virgin; the red rose for those distinguished for benevolence and other social qualities. In days a little further back they used on the way to church to rest the coffin, at intervals, on resting-stones, and would put down the coffin at every crossway, kneel down, and repeat the Lord's Prayer; they did the same at entering the churchyard. The route funerals took at this period, and position of these stones, are known. A path, called the "funeral path" once went through "Hollis Stone field," which is at the back of Llansadurnen church and by the Hugden road; it joins the fields belonging to Capthorne farm, and is near a farm — "Tavern Devlas." This was the ancient route for funerals coming from the houses about here to Llansadurnen church; for the Hugden road was then in a bad condition in winter. The four stones forming the resting-stone still remain in Hollis Stone field. One large square stone, with the surface only visible, has a circle carved in the middle of it with an inner circle. Another large square one, sunk in the ground too, has a small round hollow in its middle, generally filled with water. In olden times they used to throw pins into the water here, then take them out to prick their warts, believing it was a sure cure. The two other stones are so deeply buried that only a portion is seen. The sketch here represents them. Another resting-stone stood on "Resting Stone Hill," which is on the opposite side of the road to where the Broadway Mansion was, and overlooks the ground that house occupied. To go to it, you enter a gate on the left hand of Broadway road coming from Laugharne, and nearly opposite the two curiously bent trees, which are in grounds of Broadway Mansion. From this gate you go straight up the slope of the hill, called "Dell Grove;" rails go up on your left all the way, dividing Dell Grove from the Paddock. Near the top of the hill you have to pass through a gate which leads into Resting Stone Hill. The road now bends to the left after leaving this gate; then goes along the hill to another gate by which you enter another road. At the edge of it, and on your left, stood the resting-stone, about 150 yards from the gate just mentioned. It was five tons in weight, two feet high, four feet wide, six long. Continuing along this road, you come to another gate, through which this road passes along a field to a gate opening on to Sir John's Hill. Dell Grove is beneath Resting Stone Hill; Portland Field lies just beneath the field next to Resting Stone Hill. This is the ancient road by which the people of the marsh passed to and fro to Laugharne when the Broadway road beneath was too bad to traverse, and by which funerals from Llansadurnen passed to Laugharne church. When they arrived at Sir John's Hill, they crossed it, and went down the road which leads out by the line of houses at Gosport; but instead of coming out there, they took the dirty lane on the right, which is at the back of those houses, and passes by Gosport House to the Strand, which lane is the old route I have described in Part VIII. When funerals came by the ancient route I have there noticed, which is by Little Madras Hill, issuing out opposite Kingaddle into the main road; before entering this road they rested the coffin by this hill, just where the roads meet, that is at the cross roads, and sang a hymn. An inhabitant told me she remembered their doing this. I thought, when I stood on this spot, where so many a one that had fell asleep had rested on their way to their last resting-place, with voices rising up from this elevated spot, what a glorious place it was for such an act of worship! — in the midst of the beautiful works of the Creator, Swelling hills stretch in all directions; the undulating line of hills ending in a point on the fine sands of Pendine. Before them, a village perched on the extreme point of a hill, its white cots, hay-stacks, and church-spire peeping through the trees: below, the pleasant green fields. On the right. Fern Hill, with its dark patch of trees, gives a pleasant change to the scene; on the left Coigan rises, clothed with a thick wood on its slope, which has been destroyed lately. Beyond the hills, hard by, are the distant hills, where flitting gleams of sunshine disclose sweet patches of green. The Perselau mountain far away, with its peaks grey and shadowy, shuts in the prospect; the everlasting hills around, the great deep beneath. A lady of this town remembers a resting-stone by the Mariner’s Corner, turning to Victoria Street. Their care of the dead did not end here; they planted the grave of the relative with shrubs and flowering plants. This is an ancient custom, still observed in Wales. It is a pleasing scene, on Easter eve, when those who have relatives buried in Laugharne churchyard, are busy putting the graves in order. Every Saturday or Sunday, throughout the year, that any kind of flower or green is to be had, they lay crosses or crowns or bunches of flowers on the graves. Tradition says it had its origin in the people being told they would not be happy unless they cleaned the graves for Sunday. An author, writing in 1803, says: "So great is the reverence the Welsh have for the resting-places of the dead, that no one is ever known to touch a flower on a grave; it was considered sacrilege." It were well if some of the present generation did imitate their exemplary ancestors; we do sometimes hear of flowers stolen from the graves.

...

A strong belief exists in the diocese of St. Davids, that lights "traverse the road by which the dead will be carried to burial." The funeral procession too is seen previously, and the mourners distinctly recognized. One tradition says, they appear in answer to the prayer of St. Lanon. She desired that the people might be warned before death came, and so have time to prepare themselves. Another says, it was in consequence of Bishop Ferrars, who was burnt at the stake in Caermarthen, declaring that if his doctrine was true, a light would go before the death of every person in the diocese of St. Davids. I have received many relations of these appearances from parties of great respectability, and whose veracity and freedom from fanciful imagination I am sure of. These are some: An inhabitant of Laugharne, of a most respectable old family of the place, himself universally esteemed, told me that as he was walking one evening on the St. Clears road, he saw in the distance two lights moving across a field, and enter the Pilgrim Church by the river. A person who was with him saw them as well. At another time he saw a funeral procession go into this church. A member of a most respectable, substantial family of Pendine related this to me. Her brother, with his little son, was on a visit to her family. This son was suddenly seized with fever about eleven o'clock, and in great danger. The father for a while was walking before the house, when he saw a small light in the churchyard of Pendine, moving towards the church porch, and going into the church. He saw it inside the church; it came out and passed to the tomb of his family; there it stood fixed. The child died soon after. On the spot where the light had rested the child was buried. He had disbelieved, now he believed in the lights. A member of the same family gave me the following: Her husband was very near his end, when she said to him, "There is a curious little light on the Strand; what can it be?" He replied, "It is the light before death; it is for me." That it may not be thought by disbelievers that it is only Welsh superstition, and confined to Wales, I will finish the list with another which occurred in England a short time ago. A dignitary of the Church of England was dying; suddenly a very vivid light illumined the room, so much so that the man-servant was obliged to shade his eyes with his hand. He who was dying said, "Look !" After this he seemed done with earth, and had no wish to be read to, or to have any human help. The light vanished as suddenly as it came. His daughter was in the room, and saw the light, and told this to a friend of my cousin's. My family have known this clergyman many years. An old inhabitant related this — Fifty-four years ago, as some working men at mid-day in summer were cutting wheat in a field near Eglwyscummin church, they saw a funeral coming along the path in the direction of the church. While it passed they lay down. Among the mourners they recognized persons resident in the parish, and an old woman walking last, carrying green plants in a handkerchief to put on the grave. Soon after an inhabitant died. His funeral went by this path, with the same people as mourners, and the woman with plants, just as the men had seen. The relater of this was one of the most respected persons in the place.

An old woman of Laugharne said to me that she continually saw those lights. It seems from all I hear that they are seen as much as ever. I must give this singular one: A gentleman belonging to a county family of Pembrokeshire, was some years ago returning in his carriage to his home in Tenby from the railway. He was inside. With the coachman sat a tenant of the lady from whom I had this story. Between Narberth and Templeton, they perceived through the darkness of the evening a black mass moving towards them. As it approached they saw it was a funeral. The horses now plunged and reared; the carriage was overturned; the coachman and the tenant thrown over the hedge into the field, much bruised; the gentleman escaped without injury. My friend who related this had it from her tenant himself.

