
https://journals.library.wales/view/2111106/2111178/35#?xywh=-1634%2C-1%2C6151%2C4057

Cymru fu notes and queries relating to the past history of Wales and the border counties

February 25th, 1888

p92

Vol I, Part II

SOME OLD WELSH FUNERAL CUSTOMS.

Reading Paxton Hood's *Christmas Evans* — a good book, but inclined to exaggeration— I found the following :— "The superstition of the Sin-Eater is said to linger even now [about 1881] in the secluded Vaie of Cwm-Aman, in Carmarthenshire. The meaning of this most singular institution was that, when a person died, the friends sent for the Sin-Eater of the district, who, on his arrival, placed a plate of salt and bread ön the breast of the deceased person; he then uttered an incantation over the bread, after which he proceeded to eat it— thereby eating the sins of the dead person; this done he received a fee of two-and-sixpence. . . Having received this, he vanished as swiftly as possible, all the friends and relatives of the departed aidinj his exit with blows and sticks, and other indications oî their faith in the service he had rendered. A hundred years since, and through the ages beyond that time, we suppose this superstition was everywhere prevaient."

NONCON-QUILL

---


https://journals.library.wales/view/2111106/2111178/109#?xywh=718%2C463%2C2289%2C1510


Cymru fu notes and queries relating to the past history of Wales and the border counties

May 5th, 1888

p166

NOTES. THE SIN-EATER

(*ante* Feb. 25. 1888).

I find in a volume of Blackwood's (Nov., 1875) a little more information on this interesting superstition. The writer says :—

'The Scapegoat is a dark and narrow superstition still surviving in North and South Wales and the Borders. It is hard to say which is the most degraded, the employers or the employed in the transaction. (A man who gains his livíng by such services, is hired when a funeral takes place, is given a loaf of bread and a maple bowl of beer or tnilk, and a sixpence, for which he bears away all the sins of the deceased and prevents him or her walking after death.) The scapegoat in this case is currently called a 'Sin-eater.' Of such it would be no stretch of imagination to believe that like Sion-y-Cuit, the Welsh Faust, they had sold themselves to the devil."

M. E. C. F.

---

https://journals.library.wales/view/2111106/2111178/124#

Cymru Fu
May 19th 1888

p181

ABERYSTWITH IN 1820 [First part of "TRAVELLING IN WALES IN 1820"]

Perhaps tje following account of Aberystwith, taken from the unpublished MS. diary of a gentleman who travelled through Wales in his own carriage, accompanied by his wife, in 1820, may be interesting as a supplement to "Lleian's" account of "Travelling in Wales in 1873" (April 28):— "Fridaj/, Sept. 27. 1820.—Aberystwith, a pretty town enough, and, I sliould think, a very nice sea bathing place. Plenty of macliines, and a tolerable beach— not sandy, yefc thepebbles are not so large as to be offensive to the feet, as at Sidmouth and Cowes, for instance. There are some good streets, and a range of vcry good-looking, clean, and airy lodging-houses, mostly tliree,and some four.storeys high, facing the sea. At ihe 'Talbot' ourselves,"a very good inn, if they give you, as they did us, rooms at the Castle House, on the shore; if not, I should think the otliLT inn better, judging frorn outwaid appearance. Ascended the liill to the north of the town—very extensive sea viuw, reaching from the extreme point of land of Carnarvonshire on the right, to Fishguard or St. D.ivid's, in Cardi«aní-hire, on the left, forming a magnificent bay. Tlie tìne range of the lofty summits of the mountains of North Wales bounds the view behind us, and atnong them those of Snowdon and Cacjer Idris are conspicuous. Looking south, an irregular outline of hilly country is seen, but nothing that deserves the naine of mountain, till you reach some points that I suppose to be below Cardigan. Standing on the face of the hill we are now on, the bay, the town itself, and the oldcastle, situated on a projecting point of land beyond the town, present a very picturesque appearance. The town is small, of a triangular form, and stands upon a little bay close to the beach, with a ftne valley behind, through which the Rheiddol is seei> meandering for several miles. The Ystwith.from which the town takes its name, joins it on tlu other side of the castle, just befoie the unite.. streams fall into the sea. Only a few detachen fruüinentsof thecastleremain. Thereisagoodpublic walk laid out on the eminence on which it stands, and a very handsome small castellated house closi to it, erected by Mr. Uvedale Priee, in which wt are lodged. In fact, ultogether, Aberystwith nppears to me a very clean and comfortable ser. bathing place, far superior lo Barmouth, and must be a great convenience as an occasional resort to the inhabitantsof thispartof Wales." Tlie writer then goes on to describe several excursions made in the vicinity of Aberystwith, retnarking that when near the Hafod Arms and Devil's Bridge "they are only now tSept. 27) carrying corn here," showing how late the harvestmust have been. On the 28th, "After breakfast took a post-chaise" and went to see what is called the Purson's-bridge, a uarrow wooden bridye oí' a couple of planks thrown over a deep ravine from rock to rock, on the River Rhieddol—the most romantic thing possible." Frora there they '• got into their carriage at a quarter before twelve for Hafod, five miles, but making 22 altogether to Rhayader—four horses for fourteen miles very necessary." Mr. John's house at Hafod was visited and other points of interest. On Sept. 29, "Excursion before breakfast in post-chaise to Cwm Elen, five miles, and the town of Rhayader," and on the 30tli they amved at Builth, but the full description of all these places would perhaps be too long for insertion here. I may, however, return to the subject which is ínteresting when one considers the clianges time and circumstances have brought about in the different localities named. Gwensnen Gwynedd. Wrexham. 

---

https://journals.library.wales/view/2111106/2111178/153#?xywh=-900%2C466%2C4150%2C3131

Cymru Fu

June 30th, 1888

p210-11

TO DO

TRAVELLING IN WALES IN 1820 (ante May 19, 1888).

It may interest the readers of Cymru Fu to have some further extracts from the unpublished MS. diary of the gentleman who travelled through Wales in his own carriage in 1820, and as those re- lating to the more southern part of Wales will probably be most acceptable, I will resume the diary on Oct. 2,1820, the writer and his wife being on their way southwards:— "Wednesday, Oct. 2, 1820.—We proceeded onwards to Caermarthen. The valley continues wide and flat, divided into rich fields of meadow and arabl|B land, the Towey ina'fcing superb sweeps througli it. At this moment, four miles frora Caer- maithen.a fine straight reach of the river directly in front.croísed by one of the lightest and hand- somest bridges of three arches that I have seen. It is called New Bridge, and is placed in the route from Abergwillyto Pont-yr-Dulas. The Bishop of St. David's Talace, wliich we now see, is at Abergwilly. Carmaithen looks well in going down upon it, situated on a fine rising ground beyond the river and the valley; houses generally white or ochre coloured; entered by a long bridge of numerous arches with ships below it. The tide comes up here with great force. We went to the Ivy Bush Inn, which we found very good. There is nothing to be seen at Caermarthen, except its tìne situation. A very good public walk outside the town overlooks the valley and the river, a krad of boulevard like that at Brecon, and a great relaxatiou for the people of the town. It is altogether, however,a rauchlarger place, with more the airs of a county town or pro- vincial capital than I had any idea of. It is about three quarters of a mile in length, with some good streets and shops. It is considered, I believe, the capital of South Wales. "Thursday, Oct. S, to St. Clear's; heavy rain all the way, but road from the river uninteresting. Seven miles to St. Clear's, where we breakfasted, and then on to Coldblow,eleven miles; four horses for the first fìve miles; found it no imposition. Crossed the Tav by a stone bridge, running to our left to fall into the Towey; sloops come up close to the bridge......Stopt at Coldblow, a single house. Mr.--------went on to Tenby in the carriage, nine miles. I wait for the coach to Milford Haven, which is to pick me up here. Cold- blow to Milford Haven, twenty miles. We passed through the town of Narberth, and changed horses at Haverford West, a place exceedingly like a Continental town, with narrow and steep streets, paved with stones, as difficult to walk upon as those of Geneva. It is situated upon the river Cleddau, whicli falls into Milford Haven, and ad- mits considerable vessels to come up to its bridge, giving it a considerable aìlowance of commerce. The Castle is a striking object as you enter the town. It was built in the reign of Stephen, and is tolerably entire. The greatest part of it has been converted ìnto a jail. There are four churches in the place. Three miles from Narberth we crossed the Cleddyr by a fine old bridge called Canistone Bridge. The tide comes up to it. On the right is Llawhaden Castle, F. Skyrnne, Esq., situated among fìne woods, over- hanging the river, and on the left an extensive forest called Canistone Wood, ten miles round, belonging to Mr. Phillips. Three miles further on the left is Picton, Lord Milford.—Milford Haven. The Nelson Arms is said to be the best inn, but the coacli going to the other I did not think it worth while to change. A thick fog hung over the harbour, so that I could see nothing. In half an hour, however, it cleared away, and I crossed the little arm of the sea called Ha'kin Peel, or Pill, and ascended the height beyond the little battery on the west side of the harbour. From this point you look over the old part of the town, which is on this side the ferry; and the new town, which is a creation witliin the last twenty-flve years, faces you on a rising ground on the side of the inlet, consisting of a sea face and two parallel wîde streets behind it, producing a very brilliant display of white stone-coloured and yellow houses, some slated, butsiill more having'the roofs also whitewashed, and all as fresh and clean Ioufcing as if they formed one side of a newly-painted pano- ìatna. They stand on different levels, rising above each other like the seats of an amphitheatre, and I should think that the town was Iialf or three- quarters of a mile in length, from the inlet to the church, a very handsome one, of Gothic architecture, which stands one hun- dredortwo hundred yards from its eastern end. It stands out against the dark blue sky, and has a very elegant tower. Carrying your eye round by the ríght, it passes in succession over one or two little bays, and within this space a considerable number of ships of different classes are at present at anchor. Beyond the extreraity of land, on the opposite side of the estuary, can "be seen the naval eatablishment of Pater, to which the Doone's

bullding-yards were retnoved from Milford some years ngo as being better suitei for the purpose. Iti the south-west, nnother large bay, and a little below it, the qunrantine ground for ships from llie Mediterranean. Milford was greatly patronised by Lord Nelson. It grew up in a very few years, iitld is aheady a deserted-looking place, the ships kì the harbour not being sufficient, without the public works, to give employment to the population adequate to the oecupation and maintenance of the number of houses that hnve been erected under the idea of its becoming an important naval station. •' Oct. 4, Friday, 6 a.m.—Got into the landlord's boa», rowed by six or eight of the men of the dock- rard, for Pater about six miles. The new church ís well seen ns we pass it on the left. Passed CîüS'le Pill, supposed to have been a Roman encampment. We landed at Pater in an hour and a linlf, but I did not enter the yard, as the superin- tendcnt told me they had nothing worth looking «t after Plymoutli or Portsmouth. They have some ships of line on the stocks, one of 80 guns. They build under a coppered roof, which covers an ncre of ground. I walked on to Pembroke as quickly ns Icould in thehope of being in time for the Tenby coach at eight o'clocfc, but I was too late, which I did not regret ns it gave me the opportunity of seeing Pembroke, and the ruins of its magnificent cistle, as well as the castles of Carew and Manorbyr, very well worth visiting. Break- fasted at the Red Lion." The account of the cistle follows, after which, "12 noon: Post chaise to Tenby, ten miles." Then follows a description of this now fashionable water- ing-phce, which must be rescrved for another occasion, ns well as of Swansea and Cardiff, towns which in 1820 had not attained their present importance. The narrative of how they then struck the traveller may be worth recounting, and will be interesting in the present day. It is curious to note the early hours kept by the writer of the diary; Iiow frequently he nnd his wife made excursions, and even undertook a journey before breakfast, arriving at some fresh place to partake of that meal after posting from their resting place of the previous night. Wrexham. Gwenynkn Gwynedd.

---

https://journals.library.wales/view/2111106/2111359/47

Cymru Fu

August 25th, 1888
p260

Travelling in Wales in 1820

NOTES. TRAVELLING IN WALES IN 1820.

(ante, May 19, June 30, 1888).

I continue the extraets from the M.S. diary in my possession :— "*Saturday, Oct. 5, 1820, Tenby*.— The sands at Tenby are delightful, but they seem to be the only *agremens* of the place for the open air; there are neither walks nor rides in the town or out of it except on the sands. It is said to be a good winter residence for quiet people of small fortune, cheap and cozey, with balls, cards, private parties, and, as Matthews has it, 'all that kind of thing.' There are some bits of ruins about the town. It is of Flemish origin, and seems to have been surrounded by an embattled wall, with numerous towers. Some fragments of a castle stand on a rock which forms the outer side of the harbour, and on another curious detached rock, which stands a little way from it on the sands, and is surrounded by the sea at high water, is a singular lofty opening with something in the form of a Gothic arch. It is amazing how fast the tide comes in, and how soon it covers the sands. One might be easily intercepted by lingering too far out.

"*Sunday, Oct. 6.*— We set off at 11 for Carmarthen, retracing our steps by Coldblow and St. Clear's, 29 miles. The Lion is a good inn, well situated, close to the harbour. We wished to have gone direct to Swansea without going round by Carmarthen, but there is no other road, in consequence of the estuaries of several rivers which indent the coast in this direction. Going down the street of Tenby I observed a number of men in their best cloihes, principally black. I at first thought it was for Sunday, but seeing a woman among them with tray and glasses in one hand and a bottle in the other, I stopt (being then on foot to ease the horses in ascending a hill at the end of the town) to inquire the meaning of it, when one of the then informed me they were there to attend a funeral, and that it was the custom to assemble before the door of the deceased, and to be served with wine and warm ale in the street, before the body was brought out of the house. It is a Flemish custom, I suppose. I never heard of it anywhere else in England. Something of the kind prevails in Scotland, but it is there *in the house*, and I believe sometimes, if not always, after the interment. The whole road from Tenby to Coldblow is bleak and uninteresting— coal, peat, few houses, and few trees.

"*Monday, Oct. 7.*— Carmarthen to Pont y Dulas, 19 miles. Nothing at all interesting on the road. Breakfasted at Pont y Dulas, a brieht house, nice and clean enou»h. Swansea, Mackworth Arms, said in the books to be the best inn in the Principality. We found it the worst and the dearest. We aitempted to go to the Mumbles and Oystermouth Castle, but the sands were impractable for a carriage, and we had to relinquish the expedition. I observed, however, that the whole coast beyond Swansea is extremely well wooded, even to the water's edge, particularly Oystermouth Castle, belonging to a General Wood. Swansea is the best town we have seen in Wales. One very good wide street, with respectable shops on each side. The other streets also good, all with side pavements. The bay is superb, 21 miles across. I can easily imagine it to resemble the Bay of Naples. Fine extensive sands for riding, walking, and bathing. The equestrian must, however, know how to steer clear of quick sands. The lodging houses are well situated, facing the bay, and in full enjoyment of sea air, which is the only air the good people of England are not afraid to admit into their houses, or allow to blow upon their persons at all times of the day and night. The harbour at Swansea is excellent; defended by two long piers running out in a semi-circular form, so as to allow of a comparatively narrow opening for the entrance of ships which can go up the river for a mile and a half."

Wrexham. Gwenynen Gwynedd. (To be continued.)


---
https://journals.library.wales/view/2111106/2111359/58#?xywh=-856%2C107%2C4626%2C3490
Cymru Fu

Sept. 15, 1888

p271-2

TRAVELLING IN WALES IN 1820 (ante May 19, June 30, Aug. 25, 1888):—MS. diary extracts continued:— "Tuesday, Oct. 8.—Nine miles to Neath by the side of the river, with the canal between. There are copper, iron, brass, and tin-works for four or five miles up the valley, which is completely filled with smoke. The upper part of this valley is called Morristown, having been erected by Mr. Morris for his workmen, and on the summit of a high liill on the left is a building in the modern castel- lated form, which is a kind of almshouse, belonging to the same establishment. Ships come up the river, a mile and a half or two miles above the town of Swansea......Three or four miles further we come upon another valley, and extensive ruins of an abbey, but in a, very unintellígible condition. The only thing remaining really entire is an ancient hall, perhaps the refectory, divided and supported by four central clustered Gothic pillars. These are the ruins of Neath Abbey. It afforded a temporary refuge to the unfortunate EdwardH. after hisescape from Caerpliilly Castle. The ruins were lately inlmbited by several poor families belonging to the neighbouringcollieriesand copper mines, but they are now become too unsafe even for them. The town of Neath is about a mile from tiie Abbey. We cross the river by a handsome bridge before entering it, but not believing there was anything to see there, we only changed horses and returned over the bridge and go up the left hand side of the fair valley to the Lamband Flag, eleven miles. A Mr. Grant has a handsome house, finely situated, above Neath, surrounded by very luxuriant woods. At about six miles, saw on the right and across the river the Mehn Court waterfall, a very fine one, 60ft. high, in a richly wooded glen.....We were surprised to find the Lamb and Flag one of the best and most elegantly furnished inns in Wales, and both the landlordand landlady extremely attentive and obliging. "Wednesday, Oct. 9.—Visited the iron works before breakfìvst, and thought myself well re-paid. I cannot attempt to describe these stupendoua works farther than to say that they far exceed in extent, in chemical and mechanical power, in value of produce and number of hands employed, anythingl had before formed an idea of. The works I visited was the Cyfarthfa, belonging to Mr. Crawshay. To produce 1,700 tons of iron every month, at £8 a ton, 2,500 people are em- ployed at it, from £3 5s. to £3 10s. each a month. One engine, which was made in the works, is of 75-horse power, to work the blast furnaces, and the mechanism by which it does su is wonderfully simple. There are six of these furnaces constantly at work in smelting the iron from the ore, andì believe there are two or three engines. Besides the engines there are several wheels of great power for driving the rollers by which the iron is wrought into bars and rods. It is amazing to see the workmen tossabout enormous masses of red hot iron with their great iron hooks and forceps with as much ease and as little concern as if they were playing nine-pins. The village, containing at least 17,000 inhabitants, is the entirü creation of the last 50 vears. A very fine canal and an excellent road from here to Cardiff have also been the result of these works, and there are also several others be- sides the Cyfarthfa. "Thursday, Oct. 10.-11 a.m. to Cardiff, 25 miles without change of horses. We take four to the Bridgewater Arms near Pontypridd, about half- way, and where we turn off a few hundred yards to the right to see the extraordinary bridge of that name—a single very wide arch of uncommon beauty and slightness, erected over theTaff by the skill of an untaught architect of the name of Edwards, about 1755." The description of the rest of the drive to Cardiff and of that town I will reserve for another occa- sion. Could the writer of this journal now see the changes in Merthyr Tydvil, Cardiff, and the sur*

ounding country, and the enormous works which have since sprung up, he would, indeed, be astonishod. Gwenynen Gwynedd. Wrewham. (To be continued.) 

---


https://journals.library.wales/view/2111106/2111359/71#?xywh=-525%2C71%2C3735%2C2818
Cymru Fu

October 6th, 1888

p 284

NOTES. TRAVELL1NG IN WALES in 1820 (ante May 19, June 30, Aug. 25, Sept. 15, 1888).

— MS. diary extracts concluded :— "Thursday, Oct.10.—Ät the Cardiff Arms—a very good, reasonable inn. Cardiff is a much larger and better town than-I expected. It is a mile from the sea, but a good many vessels are lying in the bay. The canal and river both pass close by one side of the town, the latter crossed by a hand- 8ome bridge, leading to Llandaff, distant two or three miles, but we did not understand it was worth going to see. The old Castle is the only' thing to see at Cardiff. It belongs to the M.irquess of Bute, who has erected a handsome castellated roansion on one side of the grounds, which are laid out very handsomely in a public walk, to which the townspeopie are at all times freely admitted till a certain hour in the evening, and then the gate is closed. The keep and theprincipalentrance are the only portions of the castle that remain. The former stands on a lofly mound directly opposite to the entrance, which is tolerably entire. From another mound on the town side, near the exterior wall, there is a fine view of the town, bay, and shipping. The tower of the church is very handsome, semething in the style of the tower of Taunton, but far less elaborately wrought, and not equal to the tower at Wrexham, which in richness and beauty is far superior to both. From Cardiff we went on to Newport by Caerphilly, 20 miles. . . . Caer- philly Cnstle covers an immense extent of ground, but is in utter ruin. There appears to have been a large oblon„ hall, with entrance by a gateway, and two round towers to the east and west. On the north are dead walls with loopholes, and on the south a rnost magnificent hall 70ft. by 30ft., nnd 17ft. high, but now without a roof. On the side next the court four magnitìcent Gothic win- dows.The south-east tower has a 8triking appearance, standing 'llft. out of its perpendicular, and resting only on one small portion of its south side. It is 70ft. or 80ft. in height. This, though a leaning tower, bears not the slightest resemblance to the leaning tower at Pisa, which is not a ruin, but a stupendous hollow pillar of regular architecture, with spiral gallery nll round to ascend by. The date of the Castle of Caerphilly ìs uncertain, tliough it is obvious, from the different styles of architec- ture in different parts, tliat it has notbeenthe work of any one single period. The town itself is a poor little place, separated from the castle by a little stream, which falls into the Rumney, a sh'ort distance below.....Newport, a respectable town with some good wide streets, and from the number of sliips to be seen it must be a place of considerable traffic. A steam vessel comes here every day from Bristol. The trees in the churchyard, from w'nich ttiere is a fine and extensive view in every diiection, are amongst the most superbpieces of timber I have ever seen, consisting of oaks, elms, ashes, and sycamores of really stupendous magnitude." Two days later the tourists returned to England, and the extracts conclude. The earlier portions of the diary, referring to North Wales, I may give on another occasion. GWENYNEN GWYNEDD. Wrexham.