
https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.238346/page/n11/mode/2up
Funeral Customs
by Puckle Bertram S.
Publication date 1926
p68-71

A less known but even more remarkable functionary, whose professional services were once considered necessary to the dead, is the sin-eater. Savage tribes have been known to slaughter an animal on the grave, in the belief that it would take upon itself the sins of the dead. In the same manner, it was the province of the human scapegoat to take upon himself the moral trespasses of his client — and whatever the consequences might be ift die after life — in return for a miserable fee and a scanty meal. That such a creature should be unearthed from a remote period of pagan history would be surprising enough, but to find reliable evidence of his existence in the British Isles a hundred years ago is surely very much more remarkable.

Professor Evans of the Presbyterian College, Carmarthen, actually saw a sin-eater about the year 1825, who was then living near Llanwenog, Cardiganshire. Abhorred by the superstitious villagers as a thing unclean, the sin-eater cut himself off from all social intercourse with his fellow creatures by reason of the life he had chosen; he lived as a rule in a remote place by himself, and those who chanced to meet him avoided him as they would a leper. This unfortunate was held to be the associate of evil spirits, and given to witchcraft, incantations and unholy practices; only when a death took place did they seek him out, and when his purpose was accomplished they burned the wooden bowl and platter from which he had eaten the food handed across, or placed on the corpse for his consumption.

Howlett mentions sin-eating as an old custom in Hereford, and thus describes the practice : " The corpse being taken out of the house, and laid on a bier, a loaf of bread was given to the sin-eater over
the *corpse* , also a maga-bowl of maple, full of beef. These consumed, a fee of sixpence was given him for the consideration of his taking upon himself the sins of the deceased, who, thus freed, would not walk after death." He suggests the connection between the sin-eater and the Jewish scapegoat of the old Testament. `[England Howlett. F.S.A., "Burial Customs" (Curious Church Customs and Cognate Subjects). Edited by Wm. Andrews]`

We shall consider in its proper order the relations between death and the funeral feast, but there is an aspect of the matter which is closely allied to the idea of the transfer of a personality for good or for evil, by means of the consumption of certain food, as in the case of sin-eaters, or by actually partaking of such parts of the human body as are associated with vitality. Traces of this revolting cult are still to be found, but its roots are deeply buried in antiquity. It is not exactly what we mean by cannibalism, in the sense in which we commonly use the word, to imply the eating of the human flesh as food. We shall remember having read in accounts of travel that these savage orgies were accompanied by demoniacal dances, which were supposed to be manifestations of joy or " war dances " in token of victory over a fallen enemy.
These dances are probably a survival of religious rites, performed the world over, in honour of a human sacrifice offered to the great god Bel. " Cannibalism," says Gamier, " appears to have been initiated by Cronus (i.e., Saturn or Cush), Cronus being the originator of human sacrifices " ; he quotes R. G. Hislop, who states that the word cannibal — our term for the eater of human flesh — is probably derived from Cahna Bal, i.e., the Priest of Bel. The eating of human flesh is still part of the religious rites of many of the Hamitic races of Africa. `[Col. T. Gamier, "Worship of the Dead." ]`
