https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001476/18320717/024/0004

TO DO

London Courier and Evening Gazette
Tuesday 17 July 1832
p?
THE ROYAL CLARENCE VASE

THE ROYAL CLARENCE VASE extracted from the Year Book of Mr. Hone, will at once relieve Mr. Robins from hazarding an inferior attempt, and will possess the rare merit of being absolutely and obviously impartial After admiring the Thyrses like ornaments of the interior, my eye was caught by the effect of shadow which dimmed portion of the exterior, and rendered more lustrous gleams shining from other parts. Lingering- the staircase, the beauty the Vase appeared gradually to unfold; a sudden drawing of a curtain obscured the daylight; and the Vase, by the illumination of gas alone, glittered like diamonds upon melting gold. By extinguishing a few of the gas burners, and reducing the flame in the others, one side of the room became darkened; parts of the Vase were in deep shadow, whilst the rest seemed a glowing golden fire, silently consuming precious gems. coveted to shut up with the stillness, and banquet my eyes through the night upon the gorgeous vision. By excluding the illuminating burners, the colossal gem appeared through the gloom mysteriously self-lighted; and I gazed and mused till 1 could imagine it to be the depository of the talisman of Eblis, which disclosed forbidden secrets and exhaustless treasures to the impious Caliph, who preferred knowledge to wisdom, and who discovered too late, that the condition of man is to be humble and ignorant. It may be added, and with great confidence, that THIS GORGEOUS WONDER, produced by native art, at the opening of a new and auspicious era in our history, should adorn THE PALACE A KING who holds the hearts of the people to his own, and rules alone by the law kindness." The proprietors are also authorised, Mr. Robins is instructed, to add the invaluable commendation contained in the following letter, the writer of which is confessedly the Magnus Apollo of the age in matters of art and taste: Bath 2.‘»d Aug. 1831 Sir—I cannot refrain any longer expressing to you, in the strongest terms, my admiration of your magnificent vase. A nobler effort of ingenuity, and. at the time, refinement, never met my sight in any part of Europe. have the honour to be, Sir, your very obedient servant, WILLIAM BECKFORD. To John Gunley, Esq." The Vase can be publicly viewed until the Sale by descriptive Catalogues at Is. each; to be had at the Egyptian Hall "f Joseph Parker, Esq., Solicitor, of Birmingham; of Messrs \niory and Coles, Solicitors, Throgmorton-street; and Mr, George Robins's Offices, in Covent-garden.

