https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000928/18430401/038/0004

Monmouthshire Merlin

Saturday 01 April 1843

p4

SOUTH WALES—BEAUMARIS,

 MacH 23. (Before Mr. Justice Williams.) CRIM. CON. EVANS VERSUS ELLIOTT. This was a special jury case, and one of alleged criminal conversation, in which 1\1r. Welsby opened the pleadings, and Mr. Jervis stated the case. The action was undefended. It appeared from the evidence, that the plaintiff was about twenty-four years of age, that he was a native of some place near Tamworth, and that after having been paying his ad- dresses for several months, his marriage took place in Shrop- shire. The lady was the daughter of a solicitor at Wenlock, who died shortly before the marriage. At the time of her nup- tials she was about eighteen years of age, extremely handsome, and of most accomplished and fascinating manners and address. Immediately after the marriage had been solemnised, the happy pair left Wenlock for the island of Anglesea, in Wales, where they continued to reside up to the time of the alleged delin- quency on terms of mutual kindness and affection. Many in- stances of the strong attachment entertained and manifested towards her by Mr. Evans were detailed, which seemed to leave no doubt that he had been a most faithful, affectionate, and confiding husband. Towards the latter end of last No- vember, the defendant, who had scarcely attained his 20th year, went on a visit to the house of the plaintiff, wheie he remained about a fortnight. During his stay, Mr. Evans fancied that a more than ordinary intimacy had been spring- ing up between his wife and their visitor, which caused him considerable uneasiness, but about which he was determined to have more satisfactory proof before he even intimated his suspicions. Accordingly, on the morning of the 2nd of De- cember last, he went out to shoot, aftei having in the first place asked Mr. Elliott to accompany him on the excursion. The latter declined, on the ground that he was labouring un- der serious indisposition. On the return of Mr. Evans, he in- structed his housemaid to proceed immediately to his room, without telling her for what purpose, and there she saw her mistress in bed with Mr. Elliott, who was undressed. When Mr. Evans was informed of the circumstance, he rushed up stairs, and instantly turned his wife, and her paramour out of the house. Mr. Robert Wilsom Leschman, a surgeon, resident at Lich- field, who had been for many years acquainted with the plaintiff, deposed to the marriage having taken place, and to 'he happy and affectionate terms on which the parties had lived after their return to Wales. Ann Davies, the housemaid, deposed to Mr. Elliott having come on a visit to the house, to his stoping nearly a fortnight, and to her having gone to the room at her master's desire, and discovered the parties lying in bed together. She said she had never observed any previous liberties between Mr. Elliott and her mistress. Ann Jones deposed that Mr. Evans and his wife bad come to lodge at her house in Beaumaris some time in the April of last year, and left in October. They seemed mnch attached to each other. To the Judge: Never saw the defendant—he had not visited them at her house. The case for the prosecution having closed, The Judge said, it had been cleaily proved that during the brief space of a fortnight the defendant succeeded in seducing the affections of the lady, and perpetrating the offence for which tile aciion was brought. The only question for the jury was the due amount of damages to be given in the case. The cou. p'e appeared to have been well paired but who the defendan; was had not been stated, ne'ther had anv proof been given his means. The damages claimed were f5,008, but it would have been little wonder, under the aggravated circumstances, had they been £50,000. The jury found for the plaintiff—Damages £500. II BUNDLING." An action was brought by a farmer against another farmer, for the seduction of his daughter and the jury gave a verdict for the plaIntiff-Two guineas. It would appear that the jury gave this small amount of da. mages, in order to express their disapprobation of bundling" sa common in that part of the country. 


