


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000174/18360521/018/0004

Morning Post
Saturday 21 May 1836
p4
A writer new to the world of literature, but possessed of a faculty of great power and entire originality, is on the point of producing a work of fiction, called "The Mountain Decameron." The editor of the first critical journal in this kingdom has pronounced the author to he a man of "rare genius." In selecting North Wales as the scene of his romance the writer has opened a field hitherto strangely neglected, but one which abounds in the grandest elements of fiction, whether as regards its magnificent landscapes, its striking customs, its traditionary lore, or the strongly marked character of its inhabitants.


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000174/18360620/040/0007

Morning Post
Monday 20 June 1836
p7

The Mountain Decameron, a Romance of North Wales.—

The author of these volumes has, in treating of Welsh scenery, manners, customs, legends, &c., broken nearly, if not quite, untrodden ground. Hence his "Mountain Decameron" is full of life and novelty, and will come on the experienced novel reader quite like a surprise.  The stirring native legends and stern domestic tragedies of homely Welsh life, which form the staple of his volumes, would seem to have been penned on the spot, while the feelings which they called forth were yet fresh in the author's mind, so vivid are the colourings in which he has portrayed them, and so impassioned and truth-like their character. We have observed that Mr. Downes is a superior landscape painter, but his sketches have this additional recommendation, that they are remarkable for their strict accuracy, as, in more than one instance, we ourselves can testify.— *Sun.*

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000174/18430406/045/0008
Morning Post
Thursday 06 April 1843
p8

TO DO

BUNDLING IN WALES (From the Carnarvon Herald.) 

We earnestly invite the attention of jurors in the North Wales circuit to the distinction taken by Mr ?? Williams, in this town on Friday lav., j? Se case of seduction then tried before him. His Lordship very iustlv as well as severely denounced the mode of courtship so prevalent in the rural districts of this and some Sent counties. He stated it to be in every respect objectionable^ indecorous in itself, and calculated to induce the most en- happy results-dangerous alike to both s xes!de P riW the female of those extrinsic defences which frailty 60 much requires, and giving to her partner opportunities ™d impulses which must essentially tend to premature "and ?? intercourse. On this part of the subject common ."..and correct feeling are so obviously coincident with his Lordship's statement, that we shall not insult the understanding of our fellow-men by any lengthened observations. It it to the remedial and corrective principles which the laws nave provided xn cases of seduction, springing from so evil a custom, that we would invite more special attention, ihat a poor deluded female is not to be deprived of those compensations and mitigations of her lot which society has awarded is admitted on all hands; but, as his Lordship properly observed, in effect, the disposition to deal kindly and gently oy the female must not be permitted to operate so as to afford anything like countenance to the absurd and dangerous custom through which she has been victimised. The object of jurors ou^hl to be, at one and the same time, to discourage a dangerous and evil practice, to punish the reprobate who takes advantage of the unseemly opportunities atforded by it, and to redress, as far as may be, the wrongs which the injured party has sustained. Now, the laws of our county have provided two means of redress in wrongs of this nature. One is an action, on the part of the deluded and injured woman, for sustenance to the child, and for breach of promise to marry, as the case may be; the other is a suit on the part of the woman's parent, guardian, or master, against the seducer, for loss of services consequent upon the result of the offence. Now, in all cases of the latter kind, the jury ought not to be, as his Lordship very justly observed, drawn away from the real merits of the case by any considerations drawn from the blighted prospects of the female, or the cruelty manifested in her desertion; their duty being to award dama.es to the parent or guardian commensurate with the wrong inflicted upon him, both as it respects his finances and his feelings — the woman having a distinct and separate remedy provided for her by another mode of legal procedure against her seducer. The chief question for the jury to decide upon, in all proved cases of seduction and desertion, of the kind referred to, is, whether the parent or guardian has used due and proper caution and care in preserving that chastity, and securing those services, for the loss of which he sues. If the parent or guardian has been remiss in this respect it is clear that his damages ought to be much less than otherwise they ought to be. Now, we put it to good sense and ??, whether a parent can be regarded as having used oue guardianship over his daughter when he knowingly permits her to be courted in seclusion and darkness, and under such peculiar circumstances as mark the custom of the lower classes of the rural population in certain Welsh districts. We think that due guardianship cannot have been observed in such cases; and, therefore, that the puent is not entitled to a large amount of recompense. The custom of the country may be a fair plea for the parties immediately con- cerned, but it ought to have no weight with the parent. He can have no affections or passions to gloss over its manifest impropriety; but is bound to tend carefully the honour ol his offspring ere he has the face to call on a jury to award him damages against a seducer. Let us not be understood as being severe upon ?? frailties of the sex. Conscious of the depth, the intensity of woman's love— aware of the fact that she is too often victimised by the very trust and confidence that indicate her own sincerity and loveliness, we would be far from penning ought that should, in its remote result, tend to diminish the value of her appeal whenever she is unhappily reduced to seek redress against her seducer; we merely wish our readers to bear in mind that her injuries may be otherwise redressed, and ought to be otherwise redressed— the law in such cases having specially provided her with a fitting remedy: and that when the suit is brought by the parent the only question is, whether the parent deserves the recompense. When the action is brought by the woman, the custom of the country, and the inducements and opportunities for evil that it affords, cannot in fairness be pleaded either iv augmentation or in mitigation of damages; for both parties yielded to its malign influence by consent; and when the natural guardian of woman's honour brings an action consequent upon its breach, he ought, in equity, to be made to suffer for his own carelessness. The pernicious custom referred to ought to be, and must be put down; and this cannot better be done than by juries marking their disapprobation of it in the damages; and our firm conviction is, that the chastity of the gentler sex will be better defended by awarding slight than heavy damages. The latter might tend to deter tl.e lover, but the former are calculated to teach the father to look, as he ought to do, vigilantly after the peace and honour ofhis daughter.
