
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000094/18480208/013/0003

North Wales Chronicle 
Tuesday 08 February 1848
p3

To the Editor of the aorth Wales Chronicle. I .- _ x . . . . SIR,-YOU have, doubtless, seen the very lengthy correspondence ofa man who signs himself a VV r.srn LAYMAN, in the Carnrr rerrt Heerald. No doubt you are aware that he is a resident or your city, for in his letter dated 26th January, which appeared in the herald of the 99th, he plainly leads his readers, as will appear in the sequel, to infer that he lives in Bangor. 'I his man's productions are pretty nume- rous, and are filled with a vast deal of scurrility, abuse of the Clergy, and, I have no doubt, most un- fair statements regarding their doings. What are most notorious in this man's lucubrations arc, the entire absence of every vestige of charity, anti the exhibition of malevolence, envy, and trifair dealing. His ewhole moral composition seems to be made up of but one thing-malignity. Ile drles not seem wishful to see the state of things reforming among the Clergy, or among any other body of people- though he muiust know that morality in Wales 's very much as the Report of the Commissioners represents, it some instances, perhaps, s little exaggerated, yet lie storms, and raves, and brings forth a vast deal of irrelevant matter to try to invalidate its testimony. lie has now three Clergymen, who have had the honesty and manliness to give their opinion regard- ing the state of motals in their localities, tinder his cat-o'-nine-tails, and boa tswain 0 leys it on most lustily. Ti, prove thlt the charge of it wait of chas- tity is not more prevalent is WVeles th mi il England, or elsewlere, he brings forwvard his statistiscs; but lie forgets that three-fourths at least, if not a greater number, of the women in the lower class, and a vast number amtong a higher grade, enter the married state just before they give birth to children. 'Ihese are not numbered in the Register General's Report, and are but rarely knowvn in Entgltind. But this again gives, it is to be feared, but all imperfect idea of the extent of fornication committed under the bundling system; for, judging from the known prin- ciples of human nature, who can tell howv frequemntly the rct takes place before its coaseqluences appear? Is it not certain that a couple of young peoplie, whose passions are excited, ;trd who have opprirtu- nities in the dead of night, wvill commit an iact of uncleanness, and that, frequently, whilst irnlulginig in the beastly habit we wish to reprobate and expose to the detestation of the whole civilized wvorld? in my own family I had a couple of servants, both of whom were dismissed a few months ago, for theor bad habits; one of them told my child, who is only 15 years of age, that she iral been in the habit of bundling since site was twelve. Sue appears now to be twvo or three.and-twenty. Sie hits a brow of brass, and is mad for indulging in tire custom of bundling, whicn a barrister on this circuit lately designated "One of the ilrititutirors of the country." I hired a servant woman, last All Saints, beloiniginrg to a distant part of this county, and informed her of the regulations of my liouse,-thrt bundling wouldi rlot be allowed onr any account, and that if I detected any persons indulging ii it, I should immediately dismiss them. When the time came for this person to come to her situation. having taken second thoughts, she pretended to be ill, and continued to allege that pretence until I sent to inform her that I could wait io lenge, but must hire another servant. In three days afterwards she hired herself, and en- tered into the service of a gentletiirn some miles from, my residence. This servant belongs to one of the dissenting commtnittties. I was iiforirtne thro' more than orre chartel, that the reason sihy site would nrt fulfil her engagement with me was be. cause rmiy house ivas too strict in its discipline, bundling not being permitted. The time has come, Sir, when facts however dero. gatory to the character of the corunitry, must be told; and that principally with a hope of effecting reformation in the general habits of the people; and also to silence those calumniators who are constantly in the habit of slandering the Church and the Clergy. The following statement has come to my knowledge through a channel of unquestionable verricity; ind I will give you a clue by imeatrs of which it may, if re- quired, be further atutn)esiricated. I must confess that I blush for my country to write it, and lad it not been for tie effrotitery of "A Welsh Laymai," and other scribblers in the Crartaij Her alde', it should have remained in obscurity as far as I im concerned. IHard necessity forces it out. Well, then it happened some time ago, though not very dir. tantly, that three servant women were aceomnptanied home from charPel. in tire parish of Llahiddein iolen, by three men. T leas three men timd wvomen bundled together in the tat:nL room, and tie three men had illicit intercourse vitis each of the wonetn during tihe night!! One of thin' proved pregmnnt, and would father the child ott thr man she hked best.- T'he matter was bronuiglt before the magistrtites at Carnarvor, and tile man on whom the chilld was to be imposed made the above statement in his own defence! ! Ihis statement came from the justice- room at Carnarvot; and 1 have no doubt that any of the magistrates, who may have been present, will confirm i if required, though none of them would like to be identified with such an abominahle disclo- sure! I myself feel a tremour in every limb whilst writing the account. Whir does not see that the evidence of tire Revr J XV. Trevor may be true to the letter regarding tite state of things eservhere? Your obcdient Stevantt (JsseavLtI, 


---

https://newspapers.library.wales/view/4521735/4521743/72/
The North Wales Chronicle and Advertiser for the Principality
3rd September 1852
p8

"CAM BUI AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL ASSOCIA- TION. The sixth annual myelin;' of the C'anibiian Archico- logical Assentation commence d at Ludlow, on Mon- ùaJ, and the sittilJs did not close until Saturda) in ?,?,k. DLIlil?g the d.y the members made excur- sions to !he variulls objects of int('n.t ill the neigh- ?u'h?' and ti?? IIL?pil'Il IVitl? li?,? leading of papers on subjects embraced by the asso- ciation, followed by discussions on their respective, merits, 

...

A paper was also read by Mr. Moggiidge "On the Sin-Eater!"

---


