https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000923/18951019/039/0002

North Wales Times
Saturday 19 October 1895

p2

THE SIN-EATER IN WALES.

Writing to the *Times* of Monday, Mr. Sydney Hartland, undertook to prove the existence of 'The Sin-Eater in Wales.' In a course of a long letter, he refers first to the evidence of Aubrey, who 'gives specific instances of sin-eating, not merely Ross, but also at Dynder, at Hereford, and at Llangors, in Brecknockshire, with particulars to each.' Aubrey is also said to have 'witnessed it, or ceremony similar to it in all points except the utterance of the ritual words, at Beaumaris or elsewhere in North Wales.' Speaking of offertories, he said the custom certainly prevailed in North Wales ay to 1686. A century later Pennant described the same custom. Then Miss Gertrude Hope, writing in *Folklore*, had described the same ceremony as performed at Market Drayton as recently the first July, 1893. Mr. Hartland says he can, if necessary, give other cases from Shropshire. This shortly the evidence upon which be relies.

'Now,' he continues, 'what is the negative evidence? amounts to this: — 1. Canon Silvan Evans, though accustomed from his profesion to attend funerals, and though interested in folklore, never found a trace the custom, nor has found it mentioned in Welsh literature. 2. He made inquiries of the vicar of Llandebie, who, together with Mr. Rowland, the schoolmaster, denied the existence of the practice in that parish. An intelligent octogenarian in the parish of whom the vicar inquired also denied it. 3. The Rev. T. Eynon Davies also denied it in reference to Cwmamman, founding his denial not merely upon his own experience (not a very long one in 1882), but also upon the statements of octogenarians. None of these denials can outweigh the positive statements already cited. The custom certainly existed entire in the 17th century Llangors. Shorn of the ritual words, it maintained itself into the 18th century in North Wales, and down to a few years ago in Pembrokeshire. We may be sure it did not maintain itself only in these places, especially having regard to the practices at Market Drayton and in Derbyshire. It is unfortunate that Canon Silvan Evans's inquiries at Llandebie were not set on foot until more than a quarter of a century after the alleged event. The lapse of time must effect the value of his negative results. More than this, however, his inquiries were made through the clergyman and the schoolmaster. The latter, was, we are told, an old resident: but the clergyman had only been vicar for fourteen years, though he described himself as having known the neighbourhood well for twenty five years, which may mean much or little. We nave no means knowing in what form these gentlemen in turn put their questions. That may make all the difference. In any case they are precisely the persons who would not be likely to discover the superstition, if it existed. The Rev. Elias Owen, Diocesan Inspector of Schools and one of the chief authorities on Welsh folklore, relates that once, being in a certain parish for the purpose of examining the school, he took the opportunity of asking the clergyman concerning the superstitions of the place, when he was met by the dignified repulse, 'Our people not superstitions, glad to say.' His inspection over, he asked the first class, 'Now, children, can yon tell me of any place where there is a bwggan (ghost or bogey) to seen, or anyone who has seen one? Instantly every hand was stretched out, and every child had story to tell. The fact is, the people hide their superstitions from all such representatives of modern culture as clergymen and schoolmasters; and it is no uncommon experience that the existence of matters of the kind perfectly well-known to the peasant is stoutly denied by that same peasant to the clergyman when he asks about them. The Roman Catholic priest, who has in the confessional a weapon much more powerful than the Anglican, is often baffled by his flock. The testimony of the Rev. C. F. Ryan, curate of Drangan, when before the magistrates on the Clonmel 'witch-burning' case, is express, and is of the greatest weight on this point. The reason of the concealment comes out in his evidence. It is founded the known hostility of such personages as the minister to the ancient superstitions. On the whole, then, with all respect to Canon Silvan Evans (whose services to Welsh learning are recognised by every one), his denials and the results of his inquiries do not countervail the positive evidence of the existence of the sin-eater in Wales; and the same remark applies with even greater force to the Rev. Eynon Davies, whose enquiries were made later still. I fear that, consciously or unconsciously, the denial has its roots in mistaken national local patriotism, which perhaps peeps forth in Mr. Thomas's vehemence and in his allusion the 'Celtic fringe.' We are accustomed to this sort of thing among the Irish, who so greatly resent Giraldus Cambrensis's account their forefathers (in the main, I believe, perfectly true) that they call any daring lie 'a Giraldus.' It is fair, however, to Canon Silvan Evans to say that he entirely disclaims this very natural feeling, putting the question purely as one alleged matter of fact. My own numerous Welsh friends will not suspect me of any antipathy to their nation, or any desire to wound their susceptibilities in declining to accept Mr. Thomas's verdict. I regard the sin-eater only as an interesting relic of immemorial antiquity; and the last thinh I should dream of would be to make its possession the basis of any imputation against Wales or the Welsh."
