https://archive.org/details/originsofenglish00elto/page/176/mode/2up?q=sin


Origins of English history
by Elton, Charles Isaac, 1839-1900

1882

p181-2

In the same connection we may mention the "Cursing-wells," where the jealous and disappointed might imprecate destruction, as at the Altar of the "Mount of Cursing," on the basket and store of their neighbour, "the fruit of his body and the fruit of his field." It was thought that by performing the rites of an impious service, by casting in a pin or a pebble inscribed with the enemy's name, the spirit of the well would cause the victim to pine and die unless the curse should be willingly removed. [St. Elian's Well in Denbighshire is described as "the head of the Cursing-wells." A full description of the ceremonies will be found in Mr. Sikes' recent work upon the Welsh folk-lore, Brit. Gobl. 355. Among the authorities cited are Camb. Pop. Antiq. 247; Archeol. Cambr. ist Ser. i. 46. Compare Souvestre's account of the Chapel of *Nôtre Dame de la Haine* at Tréguier in Brittany. *"Une chapelle dedice a Notre-Dame de la Haine existe toujoiirs pres de Tregide?; et le peuple n'a pas cesse de croire a la puissance des prieres qui y sont faites. Parfois encore, vers le soir, on voit des ombres honteuses se glisser furtivement vers ce triste édifice place au haut d'un coteau sans verdure. Ce sont des jeunes pupilles lassés de la surveillance de leurs tuteurs, des veillards jaloux de la prosperité d'un voisin, des femmes trop rudement froissées par le despotisme d'un mari, qui viennent la prier pour la mort de l'objet de leur haine. Trois 'Ave' dévotememt répétés, amènent irrévocablement cette mort dans l'année." Derniers Bretons, i. 92. See as to Cursing-stones in Devon and Ireland, N. & Q., 5, v. 223, 363.]

Our last example of these abnormal usages shall be taken from the superstition of the Sin-eater, which certainly prevailed in Herefordshire, though it may be doubtful whether it extended to the neighbouring parts of Wales. "In the County of Hereford," said Aubrey, "it was an old custom at funerals to hire poor people who were to take upon them the sins of the person deceased. The manner was that, when the corpse was brought out of the house and laid upon the bier, a loaf of bread was brought out and delivered to the Sin-eater over the corpse, as also a Mazard-bowl of maple-wood full of beer which he was to drink up, and sixpence in money, in consideration whereof he took upon him *ipso facto* all the sins of the defunct and freed him or her from walking after they were dead." [Aubrey, in the "Remains of Gentilisme," published by the Folk-lore Society; Sikes, British Goblins, 325; Hone, Year-book, 858. "I remember," says Aubrey, "one of these Sin-eaters, he was a long, lean, ugly, lamentable poor rascal, and lived in a cottage on Ross highway. This ceremony, though rarely used in our days, yet by some people was observed in the strictest days of the Presbyterian government."] Mr. Wirt Sikes in his work upon Welsh Folklore, cited an apposite passage from Schuyler's Travels in Turkestan [Turkestan, ii. 28.]: "One poor old man seemed constantly engaged in prayer. On calling attention to him, I was told that he was an '*iskatchi*' a person who gets his living by taking on himself the sins of the dead, and thenceforth devoting himself to prayer for their souls: he corresponds to the Sin-eater of the Welsh border."


