https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000213/18761014/006/0002

South London Press
Saturday 14 October 1876
p2

Funeral Rites and Wrongs.

Whether death should be regarded as a blessing or a calamity, as the greatest good or the worst evil that could befall a man, was a strong point of contention among the early Christians. Said one of the sages, "Count no man happy until he is dead ;" and this is certainly the logical deduction from the Christian's faith. If this world of sin and sorrow is only a place of probation— a sort of purgatory wherein the faith is tried and the virtues are exercised, and if death is only the portal to "another and a better world," then it should be as the ultimate blessing, the one happy regarded toward which the imprisoned spirit should look, and the departure of friends to the brighter world should be a festival time among survivors. St Cyprian held this view, and inveighed against the custom of wearing black which we have derived from the Romans. Indeed, early in the history Christianity an attempt was made to change this funereal hue. White was worn in England, as I gather, in early times, and red and purple have each a sort of admitted claim as mourning eve.n in our ewn day. Henry VIII. wore white for Anne Boleyn but then she is said to hare worn yellow for Catherine of Arragon. This is the Egyptian and, I believe, the Chinese colour; but I know of no ether instance of its use in England. By the way, the Syrians and Armenians are said to have worn light blue or sky-colour, as indicating the place they wished the dead to go to, and there are worse ideas than this. In the main we have clung to black, and it certainly has a fitness, because in spite of faith sad reason — in spite of the passages in oar Funeral Service in which we express our gratitude for the deliverance of this our dear brother or sister out of their mortal misery, the English always have regarded death as a calamity, and adopted funeral ceremonies and a style of mourning essentially . Pagan. It may be said that our grim ceremonies and sombre garments simply express what we call it — "mourning ;" but the whole tenor of our proceedings is inconsistent with active faith in the beatific condition of the dead, and strictly insccord with "sorrow without hope." We are glib in our expressions touching "the better land," the "happy release," and so forth; but our proceedings are those of persons borne down with a sense of the direst calamity.

To a certain extent, however, much that we do is conventional, and has no particular meaning, except a general desire to free ourselves from the suspicion of not paying proper respect for the dead, or of failing in the expression of a full sense of the calamity we have sustained. A sense of what is due to the dead is very strong upon us as survivors, and leads us into many follies. Some of these we are gradually freeing ourselves from, but the emancipation might be carried much further. What is due to the dead takes the form of expending no inconsiderable part of what was left behind him for his wife and family in giving him a "funeral," which, in ninety-nine eases out of a hundred, is a caricature of ceremonial observances belonging to a grade of life far higher than he could presume to, and in accordance with social conditions wholly obsolete. Is there anything in the world more ridiculous than making a dead man play a part which in life be would never have thought of attempting, except on the stage? Yet when a funeral is "performed "— a capital word that "performed"—this is the performance – the person is buried with Baronial rites! Our good friend the opulent cheesemonger, or our other good friend, the wealthy drysalter, is interred with ceremonies befitting a Baron! Says an authority on the subject: "The mutes who stand at the door represent the two porters of the castle, with their staves in black; the man who heads the procession, wearing a scarf, is the herald-at-arms; the man who carries the plume of feathers on his head is an esquire, who bears the shield and casque with its plume (of feathers); the pall-bearers, with batons, represent the knight companions-at-arms; and the men walking with wands the gentlemen ushers ;" and so on throughout the rest of the performance.

There are, I am happy to say, distinct indications of revolt against this absurdity, and much beside that pertains to the burial of the dead. We have won the right of being buried with or without Church sanction in consecrated or unconsecrated ground, and with entire liberty as to the sort of service to be adopted on the occasion. Those who desire it can have the attendance of a priest at the grave, but he is no more indispensable than a sineater. "And what," I bear some of my readers ask, "is a sin.eater?" Well, he is not a person easy to find in these days, but followed an indispensable occupation in the past. He was generally an old man, the Pariah of a village, who, before every funeral, went and stood at the door of the house, where was given him a sixpence, a loaf of bread, and a wooden bowl of beer or milk. And as the coffin passed out, he ate the bread and swallowed the draught, and in so doing took upon himself the sins of the departed, and went his way. We are well rid of the sin-eater, who throve in the last century; but there still linger around us customs and usages hardly less preposterous.

Directly we lose a dear one, we set about adding to our real grief by every accessory likely to stimnlate it. We put the house in darkness—we make the undertaker and his men masters of the position —we provide everything at any outlay which conduces to the success of the Baronial obsequies. Useless display and unseemly extravag mark "the first dark days of nothingness." The result to those with means is a sense of having taken part in a sham parade of grief which jars with the real muse of grief in the heart—of having called the world to sec how thoroughly we have squared our sorrow to the requirimuenth of fashion, even to the smallest details, and how lavish has been our respectfnl expenditure. All this is a hollow sham. On the other hand, to the poor and struggling the Baronial show often adds, from its costliness, to the real misery of the situation—death is supplemented by debt, and what was squandered in useless trappings is sorely lacking for the bare necessaries of life. Funeral reform has begun, but it must be carried farther yet. The coffin must give place to the simple bier: the "trappings and the suits of woe" must be looked upon as impertinent; the foolish accessories which swallow up the means of the struggling must be voted unfashionable: and above all, the churchyard fees for this, that, and the other nonsense, must be swept away as impositions. Surely we are sufficiently advanced to bury our dead, and comport ourselves as Christians rather than Pagans; and the intellieence of the day should be equal to the abolition of the monstrosity of sham Baronial obsequies.

RUPERT.

