https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002194/18360617/045/0003

Sun (London)

Friday 17 June 1836

p?

LITERATURE.

MOUNTAIN DECAMERON-3 VoLs.

Bentley London, 1836.

The author of these volumes, a gentleman by name Downes, has, in treating of Welch scenery, manners, customs, legends, broken neatly, if not quite, untrodden ground. Hence his "Mountain Decameron" is full of life and novelty; and will come on the experienced novel-reader quite like a surprise. The stirring legends, and stern, domestic tragedies of homely Welch life, which form the staple of his volumes, would seem to have been penned on the spot, while the feelings which they called forth were yet fresh in the author's mind—so vivid are the colourings in which he has pourtrayed them, and so impassioned and truth-like their character. Another recommendation of the "Decameron” is its utter absence of anything like literary tact or mechanism. Mr. Downes has nothing of the practised book-maker about him ; he does not wire-draw his incidents ; or indulge in melodramatic surprises ; but trusts to nature for effect, who—as she always does to those who place a lively faith in her impulses—carries him handsomely through. Our impression on reading these volumes, is that the author is a man of a vigorous and imaginative turn of mind, who thinks for himself, and writes from the promptings of his own heart. But though he possesses much of the poetical temperament, yet strange to say, he makes sad work with his poetry, mistaking mysticism for sublimity, quaintness for fancy, and affectation for feeling. Out of some ten or a dozen poems which are scattered throughout the "Decameron," we have been able only to discover four good lines, which occur in some stanzas on the Ocean. In justice to Mr. Downes we subjoin them :

"*What knells for broken hearts these waves have tolled!*
*Eternal partings sob in this low roar !* 
Some hope of hearts which but that one consoled, 
Thy every night-storm blasts on every shore !" 

The lines marked in italics appear to us eminently beautiful. But if our author's poetry be indifferent, his prose is quite the reverse. It is bold, rough, and racy, and remarkable for the felicity of its epithets and metaphors. Thus, speaking of a wife who was constantly miserable because her bed was barren, Mr. Downes says of her, that she fancied her husband's eye "turned coldly on her, and her *unoccupied* bosom." A young, enthusiastic scholar in love with an artless Welch girl of good family is described as "feeding in solitude on the white beauty of her idea ;" and a seastorm is thus graphically painted :—"The echoes of the tremendous falls of the broad sea's sweep, lashing the rock beach on the seaward side of the Great Orme, were like thunderclaps run into one another ; and the real thunder of the sky, shut up by clouds as by mighty folding doors hung with mourning, already came groaning from the distance." In sketching scenery, our author evidently takes Crabbe for his model ; as the following extract which has all his force and literalness will show : "On each side, a marbled expanse of the finest sand stretches away *yellowing* in the gold light of a summer morning. No horrid depth of black mud (half smothering you in imagination with its mere look) here scowls on the retrocession of the sea. As we stand on the edge of the sea-river, a crowd of mountain tops is in lofty distance before us, rolled up yet in a night of their own, but *grimly* yielding to the broad morning laugh of the whole sea firmament, of June blue. Close beside us, all is home-felt beauty. The little ferry-house, the patter. ing of a sea at play with real green banks ; all that a quiet eye can desire, to transmit a sympathetic quietude to the heart, in the way of scenery, is here. Meadows, a little marsh ground, wild wood, and green sward heights, lowing cows, bleating lambs, *singing bare-foot girls among them all*, and that smiling, heaving, half sea, half river, are all that meet eye or ear."

The introduction of the "*singing, barefoot girls*" greatly assists the life and animation of this glowing landscape. But Mr. Downes has loftier qualities than those of a picturesque landscape painter. He is a man of deep and, at times, even original powers of thought, to which he gives fit utterance in eloquent and impassioned language. The subjoined apostrophe is put into the mouth of a philosophical Recluse, grey in years and disappointed in hopes, who is musing at night by a sea-coast abounding in ruins : 

"If man be a worm, a grain of these sands, a nothing in the universe, man's woes also are nothing. Does my heart bleed or quake for the coming ills of my country ? I know, I see, where will be its place *presently* in this dumb, eternal revolution of the kingdoms of the creation—with Balbec in the desert ? Is my blood boiling with some wrong inflicted on me by my brother worm ? I come to this eloquent wilderness of waves as to a solemn wood for meditation, and it tells me that I have only *to fold my arms*, smile at the injurious wretch, and wait; for he is already dying Time is bringing up my enemy to judgment. Mortality has already on his ghastly head the sable coif, the token of his death-doom being about to be read, and while I cry Revenge,' behold, I am crying against ashes—a shadow—a nothing ! Why should I gnaw my own heart because I do not obtain the distinction which I fancy due to my gifts among men ? I think what man is ; I handle a dead bone, firm and unperished yet, and learn that even these brittle cancelli of its marrow-cells, have survived all the generations of mankind not born ; that the primeval giant-beast its owner, was in his living strength, while man was yet in his clod ; was breathing before that clay was breathed into by the spirit of his Maker ; ere it caught the fearful privilege *to be*; and started up—a heart !—a hand !—a tongue !—a brain !—to throb, to agonize ; to work good or evil ; to pour a burning eloquence ; to *think* through all God's universe, and almost to pry around his throne. And then, ah then ! and soon, through clammy sweats and agony, to return whence it started ; to be mastered by a vile worm ; to lie mute as this half-animated polypus at my feet ; to swell the festering masses that crowd this grave I stand on."

This is finely felt and finely expressed, though we fear the thought is of too elevated and abstract a character to please the watering-place readers of fiction. It is simply calculated to perplex them. Far more intelligible to such readers, and equally beautiful in expressions, are these reflections, which proceed from the same thoughtful Recluse, of whom we have just made mention. He is describing the duties which he owes to himself in the grey evening of his existence :

"My brother-men, good night. With you, and for you, I have lived, but now the evening of my life is stealing on me, with its cool, its damp, its shadows; I would fain now live a little to myself, awhile to nature, as, perhaps, soon to live to God, and in his presence. It is better to be prepared; to listen for the calling voice in the stillness of woods, than to be astonished with it, as by a thunder-clap, in the forgetful revels of cities. As on this Ystwith side, in this sweet valley, I observe preparations for the night ; the sounds of the day growing few, those few, faint and drowsy; the harmless man just finished folding his sheep, and no more to do ere he lie down, than look awhile at that beautiful sky, and listen the first owl's voice ; his wife heard indoors, singing their child to sleep, where father, mother, and child will be presently sleeping together, under that wild flowered roof—so let *me* too *look indoors*. It is time to compose my agitated bosom after the stir of life's day, to let contentious thoughts cease, and all fierce wishes be lullabied to quiet, to deep sleep. Oh, it is well—it is needful, this gentle, melancholy twilight to man's life! This breathing, resting !space between two worlds—this soft break of the transition front the world of sun to the world of night—the grave."

There are numerous other passages in the "Decameron" nearly, if not quite, equal to those we have quoted above—passages which show a deep insight into the workings of the human heart ; which abound in pure, healthy sensibility ; and convince us that the author is one who, even in his most abstract speculations, turns a trembling, ever watchful ear to "the still, sad music of humanity." As regards the tales, they are, for the most part, of a stern, tragic cast, and occasionally repulsive in their incidents, like the fictions of Banim—and for this reason, that Mr. Downes, like the Irish novelist, does not draw on his own invention, but from the domestic annals of a semi-barbarous peasantry ; for such, in truth, were the Welch Indigetes up to the close of the last century. The best tale in the "Decameron" is, "The Tragical History of Marmaduke Paull," which is throughout worked up with uncommon power. The description of the lone, impassioned lover's feelings, when he discovers that he has formed an attachment to his own daughter ; of the fearful struggle in his mind when he makes the strange discovery ; of his resolution to commit suicide ; and of the mode in which he sets about it —namely, by waiting the approach of a raging sea, into a cavern half-way up the lofty Llandudno rocks ;—these Portions of the romance, which has the rare merit of being founded on fact, are unequalled by anything of the sort in the present day. Nor must we omit to notice the striking incident of the old Clergyman, who, when informed by the peasants who are grouped around him on the summit of the rock, that all human hope is vain, reads the burial service over the body of him who is at that moment breathing his last in the inundated cavern below We have already observed that Mr. Downes is a superior landscape painter; but his sketches have this additional recommendation, that they are remarkable for their strict accuracy, as in more than one instance, we ourselves can testify;. His allusions too, are rigidly local; and he hits off the Welch peasant, and small farmer, as none can do but he who is thoroughly conversant with their peculiarities. The great defect in his "Decameron" is that the tales are most clumsily and inartificalliy introduced; and that there are too frequent attempts at humour in the prefaratory part.

