

---

https://newspapers.library.wales/view/3353669/3353673/66/
The South Wales Daily Post
16th September 1895
p4 
CURIOUS WELSH CUSTOM.

TRACES OF CANNIBALISM IN WALES. "SIN-EATING" IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF SWANSEA.

In the course of the discussion raised by the reading of Captain S. L. Hinde's paper on cannibalism at the Anthropological Section of the British Association at Ipswich on Saturday, an interesting feature connected with old Welsh social life was referred to by Mr. E. S. Hartland, of Gloucester. He said that there were traces of the olid custom eating the dead to be found, not merely in Europe, but in our own country. In Upper Bavaria, when a dead man was laid out, the first thing was to bake a corpse-cake of ordinary flour. The cake was put on the breast of the dead "to rise." It was afterwards eaten by the nearest relatives. In the Balkan Peninsula an image of the dead was carried in the procession, and was eaten at the tomb, the relatives praying "God rest him!". In our own country there were traces of these customs. In Wales there was within the recollection of men still living, the "sin-eater". John Aubrey, who lived at the time of Charles II., and was a celebrated antiquary, witnessed this ceremony at Ross, in the county of Hereford. Aubrey described the man, who was a paid "sin- eater," as "a long, lean, lamentably poor rascal." It was the practice for a relative, usually a woman, to put on the breast of the dead a. quantity of bread, cheese, and beer. The "sin-eater" was expected to consume these things, and then to pronounce the everlasting rest of the departed. It was believed that in doing this he absolutely ate and appropriated to himself the sins of the deceased. The "sin-eater' was given six- pence for his trouble, and took care to get out of people's sight as soon as he oould. This practice was said to have existed in the neighbourhood of Swansea as recently as 1851, but the "sin-eater's" price had then risen to half-a-crown. Probably the greater part of the human race had passed through this phase of cannibalism. and it was, perhaps, a necessary phase of the evolution of human civilisation.


---

https://newspapers.library.wales/view/3354769/3354771/8/
The South Wales Daily Post
2nd June 1896
p2

*Start to see use of "sin eater* as a metaphor. (Other examples exist but I didn't keep track of them.. bah...)

Notes and Comments

"0IOrnerl(lable start was made yester- day with the preparations for the great regatta. The attendance at the public meeting was larger than bad been imagined possible for the hour selected. Local yachting interests were largely represented, a fact made all the more agreeable by the ultimate result of the discussion. V.T0 missed, bow-aver, the tradesmen who \1] tierivo th^ rhief benefit from the regatta, They, at least, might have been i expected to be eager that fch-; most should be made of a great opportunity. C.Hn it be that, inspired wiLh implicit confidence in their townspeople into whofie hauda the control of the arrangements will fall, the tradosu, reserved themselves for the later effort to find the wherewithal.- | ail events, we Ixope to see them bulk..ig large in the subscription list. The preliminary skirmish for which we had been preparing the public for days came off with tho best possible 1 suits, His Worship the Mayor facilitated agree- ment by lästing overboard the preliminary meeting which had set so many teeth 011 edge. As usual, the press was made to serve as the sin-eater. It was gravely announced that an event widely reported --in every paper to substantially th same effect—had never taken place, and the public were invited to believe that wicked newspaper men had with one ac.-ord dreamt ail the alleged facts. It is undesirable to stir the paddle afresh, or a curious light-might be thrown Oil this incident. Our readers may, how- ever, accept our assurance, given in all good faith, that the local press did not invent a single detail of that preliminary gathering, but each paper received the information ■independently from but lot the curtain descend, since somebody had to shoulder the blunder, and the press is accustomed to fill tho office of scape- goat. One of the happiest circumstances attending the meeting was the brush over tho title of the regatto. Grievances are better threshed ouL face tu face than allowed to produce a silent fester none the less mischievous because unrecognised officially. The challenge of the title elicited a prompt and unmistakable demonstration in favour of retaining for Swansea that which had been won by SwaH- nea. Mr. R. B. Lindley voiced the general feeling—its determination not to yield up to any section that which belonged to the whole community—its desiro to rally to tho common cause every particle of influence capable of contributing to success. Mr. Griffith Thomas was quick to bring the matter to a head, a.«- a practically unani- mous vote dissipated all doubt regarding the view which prevailed. Having nailed the Swansea colours to the mast the meeting proceeded to show how earnestly it sought to remove all reasonable cnuse of offence by the generosity d tho treatment accoHed the iocalyachtsmen who bad been disposed to give a sinister interpretation to the change '=' of title. There can bo 110 two opinions rc- specting the generosity. It was so thorough that the members of the Bristol Chaise: Club cannot withhold their earnest sup- port without loss of dignity and puoiio respect. The whole incident ought now to bo considered finally and happily closed and the long pull, the strong pull, and the pull all together should be a certainty, Fault will doabtiess be found wit:, the committee selected, especially by 'hose who did not attend to assist in making it less defective. of perfection are seldom practiwiSie, and the committee in the exercise .i its powers of aliditioL may be trusted to repair the more obviou.. omissions. The tonus thing to remember i«. that the sobt*»-y rock which interfered with a clear eourst j.:a? bees removed, and thai, the Hr--t-clafis yachts already promised j ensure for Swansea the distinction and the j practical beiioilt of tiie linesi. rac« ever j seen in the Bri.ol Channel. We have | now the baiI at our feet, and, j unless cmjjuiariy unfortunate or singularly j incapable 111 oor deai.ngs with the I owners of tho yachts and tiie general i pui>iiu, we stn.uiii make the first of the i great regatvas of Swansea mersiy the tore- runner of many more in the years to conn Ail It, remains to be seen whether the necessary 1 nous is also available to turn favouring c;rcnnistanci.s to account. .¡o.

---


