https://journals.library.wales/view/2043441/2044336/45

Transactions of the Liverpool Welsh National Society

Eighth session, 1892-3

1892

p44-68

Welsh Folklore: Its Collection and Study

E. Sidney Hartland, F.S.A.

p.45

Folklore is the science of tradition; and by the folklore of any people we mean the general body of its traditions, its stories, its songs, its sayings, its ceremonies, institutions, customs and superstitions, every practice, every belief, every amusement handed down from one generation to another by word of mouth or by example, but not sanctioned by any written law or civilized religion, nor transmitted as history in any credible record. Matters as trivial as nursery rhymes, riddles, or children's games are no less traditional than the mystical incantations of witchcraft, the famous legend and procession of Lady Godiva at Coventry, the stories of classical gods and heroes, the awful rites of Osiris and the Eleusinian mysteries. The folklore of Wales, therefore, is the general body of the traditions of Wales. How rich those traditions are we become conscious when we think of the stories of the Mabinogion, of Geoffrey of Monmouth, the tales and practices recorded by Giraldus Cambrensis, the fairy tales collected in recent years by Professor Rhys, the curious old funeral custom of the Sin- eater, the legends and the practices connected with wells and pools throughout the country. And these are only some of the traditions now or formerly current in Wales: traditions which for scientific interest, as well as picturesqueness, are not outdone by those of any European nation. Their picturesqueness is patent to everybody, and I need not spend any words over it. Their scientific interest lies not quite so much on the surface, and will perhaps repay a little consideration.

pp.56-61

This is an example of the scientific interest attaching to the examination of Welsh Folktales. Let us turn to an old custom which I mentioned just now—that of the Sin-eater. This remarkable custom is, I think, no longer followed, but it has only ceased within the lifetime of living men. Forty years ago, Mr, Matthew Moggridge, at a meeting of the Cambrian Archaeological Association at Ludlow in 1852, referred to it as having survived to within a recent period at Llandebie, some twelve or thirteen miles from Swansea. He said that "when a person died, the friends sent for the Sin-eater of the district, who, on his arrival, placed a plate of salt on the breast of the defunct, and upon the salt a piece of bread. He then muttered an incantation over the bread, which he finally ate, thereby eating up all the sins of the deceased. This done, he received his fee of 2s. 6d., and vanished as quickly as possible from the general gaze; for, as it was believed that he really appropriated to his own use and behoof the sins of all those over whom he performed the above ceremony, he was utterly detested in the neighbourhood—regarded as a mere pariah—as one irredeemably lost."

John Aubrey, the antiquary, writing in the latter years of the seventeenth century, gives a more detailed description, slightly differing from Mr. Moggridge's, of the ceremony, as practised in his time in Herefordshire. And he appropriately describes one of these sin-eaters, whom he himself knew, as "a long, lean, ugly, lamentable poor raskal." "The manner was," he tells us, "that when the Corps was brought out of the house and layd on the Biere; a Loafe of bread was brought out, and delivered to the Sinne-eater over the corps, as also a Mazar-bowle of maple (Gossips bowle) full of beer, which he was to drink up, and sixpence in money, in consideration whereof he tooke upon him (ipso facto) all the Sinnes of the Defunct, and freed him (or her) from walking after they were dead."

Other accounts of the Sin-eater have reached us; but it is only necessary to quote what, there can be little doubt, is a varying form of the same custom mentioned by Pennant, in whose time "previous to a funeral, it was customary, when the corpse was brought out of the house and laid upon the bier, for the next of kin, be it widow, mother, sister, or daughter (for it must be a female), to give, over the coffin, a quantity of white loaves, in a great dish, and sometimes a cheese, with a piece of money stuck in it, to certain poor persons. After that they present, in the same manner, a cup of drink, and require the person to drink a little of it immediately. When that is done, all present kneel down, and the minister, if present, says the Lord's Prayer; after which they proceed with the corpse."

It would be tiresome to go through all the steps of the enquiry into the origin and meaning of this remarkable rite. A few of the most important will exhibit to you the process of the reasoning and the result arrived at. Let us first note that the rite has to do with the disposal of the dead, that the consumption of food and drink placed upon the coffin, or rather upon the the body itself, or handed across it by the next of kin, is the substance of the rite, and that the belief connected with it is, that by the act of eating, some properties of the dead are taken over by the eater.

If we turn to the Highlands of Bavaria, we find a custom bearing unmistakeable analogies to the Sin-eater. When the corpse is placed upon the bier, the room is carefully washed. It was formerly the custom for the housewife then to prepare the corpse-cakes. Having kneaded the dough, she placed it to rise on the dead body which lay there enswathed in a linen shroud. When the dough had risen, the cakes were baked for the expected guests. To the cakes so prepared, the belief attached that they contained the virtues and advantages of the departed, and that thus the living strength of the deceased passed over by means of the corpse-cakes into the kinsmen who consumed them and so was retained within the kin. Here we find ourselves at an earlier stage in the disintegration of tradition than in the Welsh custom. The eating is not merely that of food placed upon the breast of the dead man, and so in some way symbolically identified with him. The dough in rising is believed actually to absorb his qualities, which are transmitted to those of his kin who partake of the cakes, and (consistently with the custom requiring the relatives to eat these cakes) that the qualities transferred arc not evil but good ones. The living strength, the virtues, and so on, of the dead, are thus retained within the kin.

Going a little further eastward, we are met in the Balkan Peninsula by a custom perhaps more striking still. At a funeral among the Greeks and other subject-races of Turkey, a cake made of boiled wheat is carried in the procession. After the coffin has been put into the grave, the cake is broken up and eaten by the mourners then and there above the tomb, each of them pronouncing the words: "God rest him!" This cake bears upon it the image of the dead. It is thus not merely some qualities of the dead which are believed to be absorbed in the eating: his very likeness is devoured.

Now, it is beyond question that, where in any traditional custom, we come across images or effigies of man or animal which are burnt, or eaten, or buried, or offered in anywise in sacrifice to God or devil, or to ancestral spirits, there those images, those effigies, of whatever material they are made, are substitutes only for the real thing. The man, or the animal, was originally the subject of the rite, and nothing but the degeneracy of civilization has modified the practice. So here, the cake which bears the image of the dead, eaten at the grave at the moment of entombment, can only be a relic of a savage feast, where the meat co sumed was the body itself of the deceased kinsman. In the same way the partaking of food and drink which have been placed upon the body, or the coffin, of the deceased, or are delivered across the coffin to be consumed— an act, remember, which is believed to convey to the eaters some, at all events, of the properties of the dead—can bear no other construction, can point to no other origin. The eating of the dead, however repulsive to us, is known by the testimony of ancient writers to have been the practice of many barbarous tribes; and travellers have likewise found it among modern savages. In particular, Strabo records it, not exactly of the ancient Britons, but of their cousins the ancient Irish, telling us that they considered it praiseworthy to devour their dead fathers. The inhabitants of Britain were at that time, as he expressly says, more civilized than the Irish. They had perhaps already passed beyond the stage at which this rite, in all its horrid litteralness, is possible. Among modern savages I will only refer to one case, and you must pardon me for its horror. The tribes who inhabit the valley of the Uaupes, a tributary of the Amazons, bury their dead beneath the floor of the house. About a month after the funeral, Dr. Wallace tells us, the survivors "disinter the corpse, which is then much decomposed, and put it in a great pan, or oven, over the fire, till all the volatile parts are driven off with a most horrible odour, leaving only a black carbonaceous mass, which is pounded into a fine powder, and mixed in several large" vats of fermented drink. "This is drunk by the assembled company till all is finished; they believe that thus the virtues of the deceased will be transmitted to the drinkers."

The reason here expressly assigned for the custom is neither more nor less than that given by the Highlanders of Bavaria for making and eating the corpse-cakes. It is a general belief in the lower culture that food communicates its qualities to the eater. Thus, the flesh of tigers transmits courage and strength; that of stags, speed; that of hares, timidity. The same order of thought leads the savage tribes of the Uaupes to try to retain within the kindred, the good qualities of a departed member, by consuming his body powdered in drink. The Bavarian peasant could not tolerate the coarse directness of this expedient. He tried to achieve the same result by the symbolical act of eating cakes baked of dough which had been put upon the breast of the dead man, to rise, and had in rising absorbed his virtues. In the Sin-eater, the same act is put to another, but strictly analogous, use in the absorption of the sins of the deceased. Why it was supposed that in the one case good, and in the other evil, properties were communicated I cannot tell you. Some variation in the view taken of the matter by the clergy may have led to the rite's being considered disgraceful in Wales, and so may have rendered those who persisted in it the objects of persecution. Payment to undertake the odium, the consequent degradation, as well of the rite as of the person who performed it, and the influence of the Biblical account of the Hebrew scape-goat may have done the rest. `[The foregoing attempt to explain the Sin-eater is condensed from my paper on the subject read to the Folklore Society, and published in iii Folklore, 145, to which the reader is referred for further details.]`
