
https://newspapers.library.wales/view/3855306/3855311/41/
Wrexham Guardian
27th December 1879
p5

Literary

British Goblins, Welsh Folk Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions.

By Wirt Sikes, United States Consul for Wales. (London Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, Fleet-street).

It has been known for several months past that Mr. Wirt Sikes, who has written so much about Wales and its people in the American magazines, was engaged upon an important work treating of a most picturesque side of Welsh character. This work is now before us, in a handsome volume of 428 p.p. illustrated with several drawings full of life and movement from the pencil of a Welsh artist, Mr. T. H. Thomas. The scope of the volume is clearly indicated to sell by its title, given above. It is evidently the result of long study of Welsh literature, and of patient inquiry among the Welsh peasantry. It is divided into four books, entitled respectively "The Realm of Faerie," "The Spirit World," "Quaint Old Customs." and "Bells, Wells, Stones, and Dragons." It is impossible in the limits at our disposal to do justice to a work of this character, but it may in general be said to cover the field of folk-lore somewhat exhaustively. While not intended to deal with the legends of the Arthurian period, these are often and gracefully referred to for purposes of interesting comparison with what the author terms the "humble goblins," of Welsh fireside tails— the fairies, ghosts, superstitious customs, and cromlech-hunting elves. Fairies are classified in five divisions, thus: Ellyllon. or elves: Coblynau, or mine fairies: Bwbachod, or household fairies, Gwragedd Annwn, or fairies of the lakes and streams; and Gwyllion, or mountain fairies. Numberless fairy tales are told, either as taken down from the lips of the peasantry with whom the author has conversed in his rambles about the Principality, or translated from rare and curious old Welsh volumes. As an example of the latter, taken almost at random, we may quote the following:–

Once more this legend appears, this time with a feature I have nowhere else encountered in fairy land, to wit, the father of a fairy damsel. The son of a farmer on Drws Coed Farm was, one foggy day, looking after his father's sheep, when crossing a marshy meadow he beheld a little lady behind some rising ground. She had yellow hair, blue eyes, and rosy cheeks. He approached her, and asked permission to converse whereupon she smiled sweetly and said to him, "Idol of my hopes, you have come at last!" They there and then begun to "keep company," and met each other daily here and there along the farm meadows. His intentions were honourable, he desired her to marry him. He was sometimes absent for days together, no one knew where, and his friends whispered about that he had been witched. Around the Turf Lake (Llyn y Dywarchen) was a grove of trees, and under one of these one day the fairy promised to be his. The consent of her father was now necessary. One moonlight night an appointment was made to meet in this wood. The father and daughter did not appear till the moon had disappeared behind the hill. Then they both came. The fairy father immediately gave his consent to the marriage, on one condition, namely, that her future husband should never hit her with iron. "If ever thou dost touch her flesh with iron she shall be no more thine. but she shnll return to her own." They were married— a good-looking pair. Large sums of money were brought by her, the night before the wedding, to Drws Coed. The shepherd lad became wealthy, had several handsome children, and they were very happy. After some years, they were one day out riding, when her horse sunk in a deep mire, and by the assistance of her husband, in her hurry to remount, she was struck on her knee by the stirrup of the saddle. Immediately voices were heard singing on the brow of the hill, and she disappeared, leaving all her children behind. She and her mother devised a plan by which she could see her beloved, but as she was not allowed to walk the earth with man, they floated a large turf on the lake, and on this turf she stood for hours at a time holding converse with her husband.  This continued until his death.

In Book II., "The Spirit World," the author has managed to bring together a collection of the most blood-freezing ghost stories that we have ever had the pleasure of coming across. We have little doubt this will be with many readers the most popular part of the book. The ghosts are also regularly classified, and comparisons drawn between these and like creature of popular fancy in other lands. The chapters on death-omens are especially absorbing, delineating the peculiariaties of the corpse candle, the *gwcarch yrhibyn*, the *tolaeth*, the *teulu*, or goblin funeral, and many others. It is on this head observed—

That these various portents are extensively believed in at the present day there cannot be a doubt; with regard to the most important of them, I am able to testify with the fullest freedom; I have heard regarding them story after story, from the lips of narrators whose sincerity was expressed vividly in face, tone. and behaviour. The excited eye, the paling cheek, the bated breath, the sinking voice, the intense and absorbed manner — familiar phenomena in every circle where ghost storie are told- evidenced the perfect sincerity, at least, of the speakers. It is unnecessary here to repeat, what I for my own part never forget, nor, I trust, does the reader, that Wales is no exception to the rest of the world in its credulity. That it is more picturesque is true, and it is also true that there is here an unusual amount of legend which has not hitherto found its way into books.

A pleasant change of subject is found in the Third Book, "where a large number of quaint old customs are described. The sin-eater, a custom long associated with Wales by writers in this field, is treated off at some length, and the evidence pro and con regarding it carefully collated. It is evident that Mr. Wirt Sikes, in the true spirit of scientific inquiry, has no preconceived theory to establish, and he frankly says he can find no evidence that there ever was such a custom in Wales. "The subject has engaged my attention from the first moment I set foot on Cambrian soil, and I have not only seen no reference to it in Welsh writings, but I have never met any unlettered Welshman who had never heard of it." Concerning the custom of bundling (courting a-bed), on the other hand, his testimony is that it is still practised in certain rural neighbourhoods of Wales. He adds "It is only by breathing the very atmosphere of an existance whose primitive influences we may thus ourselves feel, that we can get a just conception of underlying forces which govern a custom like this. Of course it is sternly condemned by every advanced moralist, even in the neighbourhoods where it prevails." An instance of bundling is given which came to the author's knowledge so lately as 1877. In this connection he pertinently recalls certain laws of the ancient Britons regarding courtship, which were so severe that "any other issue to courtship than marriage was practically impossible." Many of the quaint old customs in Wales, our author tells us, while they "appear to be meaningless, to people of average culture, are in truth replete with meaning:"

However trivial they may seem, they are very seldom the offspring of mere fooling. The student of comparative folklore is often able to trace their origin with surprising distinctness, and to evolve from them a significance before unsuspected. In many cases these customs are traced to the primeval mythology. Others are clearly seen to be of Druidical origin. Many spring from the rites and observations of the Roman Catholic Church in the early days of Christianity on Welsh soil — where, as is now generally conceded - the Gospel was first preached in Great Britain. Some embody historical traditions, and some are the outgrowth of peculiar states of society in medieval times. Directly or indirectly, they are all associated with superstition, though in many instances they have quite lost any superstitious character in our day.

Among those which the author considers to be of Papal origin, but which have now no moral significance is the following :—

Among Twelfth Night customs none is more celebrated than that called Mary Lwyd. It prevails in various parts of Wales, notably in Lower Glamorganshire. The skeleton of a horse's head is procured by the young men or boys of a village, and adorned with "favour" of pink, blue, yellow, &c. These are generally borrowed from the girls, as it is not considered necessary the silken fillets and rosettes should be new, and such finery costs money. The bottoms of two black bottles are inserted in the sockets of the skeleton head to serve as eyes, and a substitute for ears is also contrived. On Twelfth Night they carry this object about from house to house, with shouts and songs, and a general cultivation of noise and racket. Sometimes a duet is sung in Welsh, outside a door, the singers begging to be invited in; if the door be not opened they tap on it, and there is frequently quite a series of *awen* sung, the parties within denying the outsiders admission, and the outsiders urging the same. At last the door is opened, when in bounces the merry crowd, then the Mary Lwyd, borne by one personating a horse, who is led by another personating the groom. The horse chases the girls around the room, capering and neighing, while the groom cries, "So ho, my boy—gently, poor fellow:" and the girls, of course, scream with merriment. A dance follows — a reel, performed by three young men, tricked out with ribbons. The company is then regaled with cakes and ale, and the revellers depart, pausing outside the door to sing a parting song of thanks and good wishes to their entertainers.

*British Goblins* is evidently the work of an author well versed in the folk-lore of other countries, especially in that of Germany and Scandinavia. The copious index at the end of the volume, and the lists of contents before each chapter, add much to the usefulness of the book. It is dedicated, most appropriately, to the Prince of Wales, and its popularity in Wales is certain to be great — not because all the author's views will be entirely agreed with, but because of the amount of information it affords on many subjects hitherto little known, the deeply interesting materials of which it is composed and the sympathetic and generous appreciation of all that is best in the Welsh character which Mr. Wirt Sikes has so constantly displayed in his literary work.

